

I K I G A I 

The Japanese Secret 
to a Long and Happy Life 


HECTOR GARCIA AND FRANCESC MIRALLES 



IKIGAI 

The Japanese Secret to 
a Long and Happy Life 

Hector Garda 
and Francesc Miralles 

Translated by Heather Cleary 



PENGUIN BOOKS 


PENGUIN BOOKS 

An imprint of Penguin Random House LLC 


375 Hudson Street 


New York, New York 10014 
penguin.com 

Copyright © 2016 by Hector Garcia and Francesc Miralles Translation copyright © 2017 by Penguin Random House LLC 
Penguin supports copyright. Copyright fuels creativity, encourages diverse voices, promotes free speech, and creates a vibrant culture. 
Thank you for buying an authorized edition of this book and for complying with copyright laws by not reproducing, scanning, or 
distributing any part of it in any form without permission. You are supporting writers and allowing Penguin to continue to publish books 
for every reader. 

Originally published in Spanish as Ikigai: Los secretos de Japon para una vida larga y feliz by Ediciones Urano, Barcelona. 

Illustration here : Abbie/Shutterstock All other illustrations copyright © 2016 by Marisa Martinez Graphics copyright © 2016 by Flora 
Buki 

library of congress cataloging-in-publication data Names: Garcia, Hector, 1981- author. I Miralles, Francesc, 1968- author. 

Title: Ikigai: the Japanese secret to a long and happy life / Hector Garcia and Francesc Miralles ; translated by Heather Cleary. 

Other titles: Ikigai. English 

Description: New York : Penguin Books, [2017] I Originally published in Spanish as “Ikigai: Los secretos de Japon para una vida larga y 
feliz” by Ediciones Urano in 2016." I Includes bibliographical references. I Description based on print version record and CIP data 
provided by publisher; resource not viewed. 

Identifiers: LCCN 2017005811 (print) I LCCN 2017022599 (ebook) I ISBN 9781524704551 (ebook) I ISBN 9780143130727 
(hardcover) Subjects: LCSH: Longevity—Japan. I Longevity. I Happiness. I Quality of life Classification: LCC RA776.75 (ebook) I LCC 
RA776.75 .G3713 2017 (print) I DDC 613—dc23 
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2017005811 

Neither the publisher nor the author is engaged in rendering professional advice or services to the individual reader. The ideas, 
procedures, and suggestions contained in this book are not intended as a substitute for consulting with your physician. All matters 
regarding your health require medical supervision. Neither the author nor the publisher shall be liable or responsible for any loss or 
damage allegedly arising from any information or suggestion in this book. 

While the author has made every effort to provide accurate telephone numbers, Internet addresses, and other contact information at the 
time of publication, neither the publisher nor the author assumes any responsibility for errors or for changes that occur after publication. 
Further, the publisher does not have any control over and does not assume any responsibility for author or third-party Web sites or their 
content. 


Cover illustration by Olga Grlic 
Cover art direction by Roseanne Serra 


Version_2 



For my brother, Aitor, 

who’s said to me more often than anyone else, 
“I don’t know what to do with my life. ” 

—Hector Garcia 


For all my past, present, and future friends, 
for being my home and my motivation along 
the way. 

—Francesc Miralles 



Only staying active will make you want to live a hundred years. 


—Japanese proverb 



CONTENTS 


Title Page 

Copyright 

Dedication 


Epigraph 

Prologue 

Ikigai: A mysterious word 

I. Ikigai 

The art of staying young while growing old 

II. Antiaging Secrets 

Little things that add up to a long and happy life 

III. From Logotherapy to Ikisai 

How to live longer and better by finding your purpose 

IV. Find Flow in Everything You Do 

How to turn work and free time into spaces for growth 

V. Masters of Longevity 

Words of wisdom from the longest-living people in the world 


















VI. Lessons from Japan’s Centenarians 
Traditions and proverbs for happiness and longevity 


VII. The Ikisai Diet 

What the world’s longest-living people eat and drink 

VIII. Gentle Movements. Longer Life 

Exercises from the East that promote health and longevity 

IX. Resilience and Wabi-sabi 

How to face life’s challenges without letting stress and worry age you 

Epilogue 

Hagai : The art of living 

Notes 


Suggestions for further reading 

About the Authors 















PROLOGUE 


Ikigai : A mysterious word 


This book first came into being on a rainy night in Tokyo, when its authors sat 
down together for the first time in one of the city’s tiny bars. 

We had read each other’s work but had never met, thanks to the thousands of 
miles that separate Barcelona from the capital of Japan. Then a mutual 
acquaintance put us in touch, launching a friendship that led to this project and 
seems destined to last a lifetime. 

The next time we got together, a year later, we strolled through a park in 
downtown Tokyo and ended up talking about trends in Western psychology, 
specifically logotherapy, which helps people find their purpose in life. 

We remarked that Viktor Frankl’s logotherapy had gone out of fashion among 
practicing therapists, who favored other schools of psychology, though people 
still search for meaning in what they do and how they live. We ask ourselves 
things like: 

What is the meaning of my life? 

Is the point just to live longer, or should I seek a higher purpose? 

Why do some people know what they want and have a passion for life, while 
others languish in confusion? 

At some point in our conversation, the mysterious word ikigai came up. 

This Japanese concept, which translates roughly as “the happiness of always 
being busy,” is like logotherapy, but it goes a step beyond. It also seems to be one 
way of explaining the extraordinary longevity of the Japanese, especially on the 
island of Okinawa, where there are 24.55 people over the age of 100 for every 
100,000 inhabitants—far more than the global average. 

Those who study why the inhabitants of this island in the south of Japan live 
longer than people anywhere else in the world believe that one of the keys—in 



addition to a healthful diet, a simple life in the outdoors, green tea, and the 
subtropical climate (its average temperature is like that of Hawaii)—is the ikigai 
that shapes their lives. 

While researching this concept, we discovered that not a single book in the 
fields of psychology or personal development is dedicated to bringing this 
philosophy to the West. 

Is ikigai the reason there are more centenarians in Okinawa than anywhere 
else? How does it inspire people to stay active until the very end? What is the 
secret to a long and happy life? 

As we explored the matter further, we discovered that one place in particular, 
Ogimi, a rural town on the north end of the island with a population of three 
thousand, boasts the highest life expectancy in the world—a fact that has earned 
it the nickname the Village of Longevity. 

Okinawa is where most of Japan’s shikuwasa —a limelike fruit that packs an 
extraordinary antioxidant punch—comes from. Could that be Ogimi’s secret to 
long life? Or is it the purity of the water used to brew its Moringa tea? 

We decided to go study the secrets of the Japanese centenarians in person. 
After a year of preliminary research we arrived in the village—where residents 
speak an ancient dialect and practice an animist religion that features long-haired 
forest sprites called bunagaya—with our cameras and recording devices in hand. 
As soon as we arrived we could sense the incredible friendliness of its residents, 
who laughed and joked incessantly amid lush green hills fed by crystalline waters. 

As we conducted our interviews with the eldest residents of the town, we 
realized that something far more powerful than just these natural resources was at 
work: an uncommon joy flows from its inhabitants and guides them through the 
long and pleasurable journey of their lives. 

Again, the mysterious ikigai. 

But what is it, exactly? How do you get it? 

It never ceased to surprise us that this haven of nearly eternal life was located 
precisely in Okinawa, where two hundred thousand innocent lives were lost at the 
end of World War II. Rather than harbor animosity toward outsiders, however, 
Okinawans live by the principle of ichariba chode, a local expression that means 
“treat everyone like a brother, even if you’ve never met them before.” 

It turns out that one of the secrets to happiness of Ogimi’s residents is feeling 
like part of a community. From an early age they practice yuimaaru, or 
teamwork, and so are used to helping one another. 



Nurturing friendships, eating light, getting enough rest, and doing regular, 
moderate exercise are all part of the equation of good health, but at the heart of 
the joie de vivre that inspires these centenarians to keep celebrating birthdays and 
cherishing each new day is their ikigai. 

The purpose of this book is to bring the secrets of Japan’s centenarians to you 
and give you the tools to find your own ikigai. 

Because those who discover their ikigai have everything they need for a long 
and joyful journey through life. 

Happy travels! 

Hector Garcia and Francesc Mirau.es 



I 


IKIGAI 

The art of staying young while 
growing old 



What is your reason for being? 

According to the Japanese, everyone has an ikigai —what a French philosopher 
might call a raison d’etre. Some people have found their ikigai, while others are 
still looking, though they carry it within them. 

Our ikigai is hidden deep inside each of us, and finding it requires a patient 
search. According to those born on Okinawa, the island with the most 
centenarians in the world, our ikigai is the reason we get up in the morning. 







Whatever you do, don’t retire! 

Having a clearly defined ikigai brings satisfaction, happiness, and meaning to our 
lives. The purpose of this book is to help you find yours, and to share insights 
from Japanese philosophy on the lasting health of body, mind, and spirit. 

One surprising thing you notice, living in Japan, is how active people remain 
after they retire. In fact, many Japanese people never really retire—they keep 
doing what they love for as long as their health allows. 

There is, in fact, no word in Japanese that means retire in the sense of “leaving 
the workforce for good” as in English. According to Dan Buettner, a National 
Geographic reporter who knows the country well, having a purpose in life is so 
important in Japanese culture that our idea of retirement simply doesn’t exist 
there. 


The island of (almost) eternal youth 

Certain longevity studies suggest that a strong sense of community and a clearly 
defined ikigai are just as important as the famously healthful Japanese diet— 
perhaps even more so. Recent medical studies of centenarians from Okinawa and 
other so-called Blue Zones—the geographic regions where people live longest— 
provide a number of interesting facts about these extraordinary human beings: 

■ Not only do they live much longer than the rest of the world’s population, 
they also suffer from fewer chronic illnesses such as cancer and heart 
disease; inflammatory disorders are also less common. 

■ Many of these centenarians enjoy enviable levels of vitality and health that 
would be unthinkable for people of advanced age elsewhere. 

■ Their blood tests reveal fewer free radicals (which are responsible for 
cellular aging), as a result of drinking tea and eating until their stomachs are 
only 80 percent full. 

■ Women experience more moderate symptoms during menopause, and both 
men and women maintain higher levels of sexual hormones until much later 
in life. 

■ The rate of dementia is well below the global average. 


The Characters Behind Ikigai 

In Japanese, ikigai is written as zfecF EPH, combining zfecF, which means 
“life,” with ^§§, which means “to be worthwhile.” can be broken 
down into the characters ^, which means “armor,” “number one,” and “to 
be the first” (to head into battle, taking initiative as a leader), and §§, 
which means “beautiful” or “elegant.” 


Though we will consider each of these findings over the course of the book, 
research clearly indicates that the Okinawans’ focus on ikigai gives a sense of 
purpose to each and every day and plays an important role in their health and 
longevity. 


The five Blue Zones 

Okinawa holds first place among the world’s Blue Zones. In Okinawa, women in 
particular live longer and have fewer diseases than anywhere else in the world. 
The five regions identified and analyzed by Dan Buettner in his book The Blue 
Zones are: 

1. Okinawa, Japan (especially the northern part of the island). The locals eat a 
diet rich in vegetables and tofu typically served on small plates. In addition to 
their philosophy of ikigai , the moai, or close-knit group of friends (see page 
15), plays an important role in their longevity. 

2. Sardinia, Italy (specifically the provinces of Nuoro and Ogliastra). Locals on 
this island consume plenty of vegetables and one or two glasses of wine per 
day. As in Okinawa, the cohesive nature of this community is another factor 
directly related to longevity. 

3. Loma Linda, California. Researchers studied a group of Seventh-day 
Adventists who are among the longest-living people in the United States. 

4. The Nicoya Peninsula, Costa Rica. Locals remain remarkably active after 
ninety; many of the region’s older residents have no problem getting up at 
five thirty in the morning to work in the fields. 



5. Ikaria, Greece. One of every three inhabitants of this island near the coast of 
Turkey is over ninety years old (compared to less than 1 percent of the 
population of the United States), a fact that has earned it the nickname the 
Island of Long Life. The local secret seems to be a lifestyle that dates back to 
500 BC. 

In the following chapters, we will examine several factors that seem to be the 
keys to longevity and are found across the Blue Zones, paying special attention to 
Okinawa and its so-called Village of Longevity. First, however, it is worth 
pointing out that three of these regions are islands, where resources can be scarce 
and communities have to help one another. 

For many, helping others might be an ikigai strong enough to keep them alive. 

According to scientists who have studied the five Blue Zones, the keys to 
longevity are diet, exercise, finding a purpose in life (an ikigai), and forming 
strong social ties—that is, having a broad circle of friends and good family 
relations. 

Members of these communities manage their time well in order to reduce 
stress, consume little meat or processed foods, and drink alcohol in moderation.- 

They don’t do strenuous exercise, but they do move every day, taking walks 
and working in their vegetable gardens. People in the Blue Zones would rather 
walk than drive. Gardening, which involves daily low-intensity movement, is a 
practice almost all of them have in common. 


The 80 percent secret 

One of the most common sayings in Japan is “Hara hachi bu,” which is repeated 
before or after eating and means something like “Fill your belly to 80 percent.” 
Ancient wisdom advises against eating until we are full. This is why Okinawans 
stop eating when they feel their stomachs reach 80 percent of their capacity, 
rather than overeating and wearing down their bodies with long digestive 
processes that accelerate cellular oxidation. 

Of course, there is no way to know objectively if your stomach is at 80 
percent capacity. The lesson to leam from this saying is that we should stop eating 
when we are starting to feel full. The extra side dish, the snack we eat when we 
know in our hearts we don’t really need it, the apple pie after lunch—all these will 


give us pleasure in the short term, but not having them will make us happier in 
the long term. 

The way food is served is also important. By presenting their meals on many 
small plates, the Japanese tend to eat less. A typical meal in a restaurant in Japan 
is served in five plates on a tray, four of them very small and the main dish 
slightly bigger. Having five plates in front of you makes it seem like you are 
going to eat a lot, but what happens most of the time is that you end up feeling 
slightly hungry. This is one of the reasons why Westerners in Japan typically lose 
weight and stay trim. 

Recent studies by nutritionists reveal that Okinawans consume a daily average 
of 1,800 to 1,900 calories, compared to 2,200 to 3,300 in the United States, and 
have a body mass index between 18 and 22, compared to 26 or 27 in the United 
States. 

The Okinawan diet is rich in tofu, sweet potatoes, fish (three times per week), 
and vegetables (roughly 11 ounces per day). In the chapter dedicated to nutrition 
we will see which healthy, antioxidant-rich foods are included in this 80 percent. 


Moai: Connected for life 

It is customary in Okinawa to form close bonds within local communities. A moai 
is an informal group of people with common interests who look out for one 
another. For many, serving the community becomes part of their ikigai. 

The moai has its origins in hard times, when farmers would get together to 
share best practices and help one another cope with meager harvests. 

Members of a moai make a set monthly contribution to the group. This 
payment allows them to participate in meetings, dinners, games of go and shogi 
(Japanese chess), or whatever hobby they have in common. 

The funds collected by the group are used for activities, but if there is money 
left over, one member (decided on a rotating basis) receives a set amount from 
the surplus. In this way, being part of a moai helps maintain emotional and 
financial stability. If a member of a moai is in financial trouble, he or she can get 
an advance from the group’s savings. While the details of each moai ’s accounting 
practices vary according to the group and its economic means, the feeling of 
belonging and support gives the individual a sense of security and helps increase 
life expectancy. 


• • • 


Following this brief introduction to the topics covered in this book, we look at 
a few causes of premature aging in modern life, and then explore different 
factors related to ikigai. 



II 

ANTIAGING SECRETS 

Little things that add up to a long 
and happy life 



Aging’s escape velocity 

For more than a century, we’ve managed to add an average of 0.3 years to our life 
expectancy every year. But what would happen if we had the technology to add a 
year of life expectancy every year? In theory, we would achieve biological 
immortality, having reached aging’s “escape velocity.” 



you advance closer to the sign. When you reach the sign, you die. 

Now imagine a rabbit holding the sign and walking to the future. Every 
year that you live, the rabbit is half a year as far away. After a while, you 
will reach the rabbit and die. 

But what if the rabbit could walk at a pace of one year for every year 
of your life? You would never be able to catch the rabbit, and therefore 
you would never die. 

The speed at which the rabbit walks to the future is our technology. 

The more we advance technology and knowledge of our bodies, the faster 
we can make the rabbit walk. 

Aging’s escape velocity is the moment at which the rabbit walks at a 
pace of one year per year or faster, and we become immortal. 


Researchers with an eye to the future, such as Ray Kurzweil and Aubrey de 
Grey, claim that we’ll reach this escape velocity in a matter of decades. Other 
scientists are less optimistic, predicting that we’ll reach a limit, a maximum age 
we won’t be able to surpass, no matter how much technology we have. For 
example, some biologists assert that our cells stop regenerating after about 120 
years. 


Active mind, youthful body 



There is much wisdom in the classic saying “mens sana in corpore sano” (“a 
sound mind in a sound body”): It reminds us that both mind and body are 
important, and that the health of one is connected to that of the other. It has been 
shown that maintaining an active, adaptable mind is one of the key factors in 
staying young. 

Having a youthful mind also drives you toward a healthy lifestyle that will 
slow the aging process. 

Just as a lack of physical exercise has negative effects on our bodies and 
mood, a lack of mental exercise is bad for us because it causes our neurons and 
neural connections to deteriorate—and, as a result, reduces our ability to react to 
our surroundings. 

This is why it’s so important to give your brain a workout. 

One pioneer in advocating for mental exercise is the Israeli neuroscientist 
Shlomo Breznitz, who argues that the brain needs a lot of stimulation in order to 
stay in shape. As he stated in an interview with Eduard Punset for the Spanish 
television program Redes: 


There is a tension between what is good for someone and what they want to do. This is because people, 
especially older people, like to do things as they’ve always done them. The problem is that when the 
brain develops ingrained habits, it doesn’t need to think anymore. Things get done quickly and 
efficiently on automatic pilot, often in a very advantageous way. This creates a tendency to stick to 
routines, and the only way of breaking these is to confront the brain with new information.- 

Presented with new information, the brain creates new connections and is 
revitalized. This is why it is so important to expose yourself to change, even if 
stepping outside your comfort zone means feeling a bit of anxiety. 

The effects of mental training have been scientifically demonstrated. 
According to Collins Hemingway and Shlomo Breznitz in their book Maximum 
Brainpower: Challenging the Brain for Health and Wisdom, mental training is 
beneficial on many levels: “You begin exercising your brain by doing a certain 
task for the first time,” he writes. “And at first it seems very difficult, but as you 
leam how to do it, the training is already working. The second time, you realize 
that it’s easier, not harder, to do, because you’re getting better at it. This has a 
fantastic effect on a person’s mood. In and of itself, it is a transformation that 
affects not only the results obtained, but also his or her self-image.” 

This description of a “mental workout” might sound a bit formal, but simply 
interacting with others—playing a game, for example—offers new stimuli and 
helps prevent the depression that can come with solitude. 

Our neurons start to age while we are still in our twenties. This process is 


slowed, however, by intellectual activity, curiosity, and a desire to learn. Dealing 
with new situations, learning something new every day, playing games, and 
interacting with other people seem to be essential antiaging strategies for the 
mind. Furthermore, a more positive outlook in this regard will yield greater 
mental benefits. 


Stress: Accused of killing longevity 

Many people seem older than they are. Research into the causes of premature 
aging has shown that stress has a lot to do with it, because the body wears down 
much faster during periods of crisis. The American Institute of Stress 
investigated this degenerative process and concluded that most health problems 
are caused by stress. 

Researchers at the Heidelberg University Hospital conducted a study in which 
they subjected a young doctor to a job interview, which they made even more 
stressful by forcing him to solve complex math problems for thirty minutes. 
Afterward, they took a blood sample. What they discovered was that his 
antibodies had reacted to stress the same way they react to pathogens, activating 
the proteins that trigger an immune response. The problem is that this response 
not only neutralizes harmful agents, it also damages healthy cells, leading them to 
age prematurely. 

The University of California conducted a similar study, taking data and 
samples from thirty-nine women who had high levels of stress due to the illness 
of one of their children and comparing them to samples from women with 
healthy children and low levels of stress. They found that stress promotes cellular 
aging by weakening cell structures known as telomeres, which affect cellular 
regeneration and how our cells age. As the study revealed, the greater the stress, 
the greater the degenerative effect on cells. 


How does stress work? 

These days, people live at a frantic pace and in a nearly constant state of 
competition. At this fever pitch, stress is a natural response to the information 
being received by the body as potentially dangerous or problematic. 
Theoretically, this is a useful reaction, as it helps us survive in hostile 

cnrmnnrlinrrc Hlrzor A AAlirCA rvf r\nr m^r\1nfir\r&gt; 1a a x to* uca A tUic rAcn/vncA frv 


O Lil 1 KJ UlllU.llga. W V KsL L11V&gt;/ K/\JU±0^/ VJ1 UUI LVUIUllUil, VV HCi V LiOV^Va Lino 1 UOpUlWL/ IU 

deal with difficult situations and to flee from predators. 

The alarm that goes off in our head makes our neurons activate the pituitary 
gland, which produces hormones that release corticotropin, which in turn 
circulates through the body via the sympathetic nervous system. The adrenal 
gland is then triggered to release adrenaline and cortisol. Adrenaline raises our 
respiratory rate and pulse and prepares our muscles for action, getting the body 
ready to react to perceived danger, while cortisol increases the release of 
dopamine and blood glucose, which is what gets us “charged up” and allows us to 
face challenges. 


Cave Dwellers 

Modern Humans 

Were relaxed most of the time. 

Work most of the time and are alert to any and all threats. 

Felt stress only in very specific 
situations. 

Are online or waiting for notifications from their cell phones twenty-four hours a 
day. 

The threats were real: A predator could 
end their lives at any moment. 

The brain associates the ping of a cell phone or an e-mail notification with the 
threat of a predator. 

High doses of cortisol and adrenaline at 
moments of danger kept the body 
healthy. 

Low doses of cortisol flow constantly through the body, with implications for a 
range of health problems, including adrenal fatigue and chronic fatigue 
syndrome. 


These processes are, in moderation, beneficial—they help us overcome 
challenges in our daily lives. Nonetheless, the stress to which human beings are 
subjected today is clearly harmful. 

Stress has a degenerative effect over time. A sustained state of emergency 
affects the neurons associated with memory, as well as inhibiting the release of 
certain hormones, the absence of which can cause depression. Its secondary 
effects include irritability, insomnia, anxiety, and high blood pressure. 

As such, though challenges are good for keeping mind and body active, we 
should adjust our high-stress lifestyles in order to avoid the premature aging of 
our bodies. 


Be mindful about reducing stress 

Whether or not the threats we perceive are real, stress is an easily identifiable 
condition that not only causes anxiety but is also highly psychosomatic, affecting 
everything from our digestive system to our skin. 






This is why prevention is so important in avoiding the toll that stress takes on 
us—and why many experts recommend practicing mindfulness. 

The central premise of this stress-reduction method is focusing on the self: 
noticing our responses, even if they are conditioned by habit, in order to be fully 
conscious of them. In this way, we connect with the here and now and limit 
thoughts that tend to spiral out of control. 

“We have to leam to turn off the autopilot that’s steering us in an endless loop. 
We all know people who snack while talking on the phone or watching the news. 
You ask them if the omelet they just ate had onion in it, and they can’t tell you,” 
says Roberto Alcibar, who abandoned his fast-paced life to become a certified 
instructor of mindfulness after an illness threw him into a period of acute stress. 

One way to reach a state of mindfulness is through meditation, which helps 
filter the information that reaches us from the outside world. It can also be 
achieved through breathing exercises, yoga, and body scans. 

Achieving mindfulness involves a gradual process of training, but with a bit of 
practice we can learn to focus our mind completely, which reduces stress and 
helps us live longer. 


A little stress is good for you 

While sustained, intense stress is a known enemy of longevity and both mental 
and physical health, low levels of stress have been shown to be beneficial. 

After observing a group of test subjects for more than twenty years, Dr. 
Howard S. Friedman, a psychology professor at the University of California, 
Riverside, discovered that people who maintained a low level of stress, who faced 
challenges and put their heart and soul into their work in order to succeed, lived 
longer than those who chose a more relaxed lifestyle and retired earlier. From 
this, he concluded that a small dose of stress is a positive thing, as those who live 
with low levels of stress tend to develop healthier habits, smoke less, and drink 
less alcohol.- 

Given this, it is not surprising that many of the supercentenarians—people 
who live to be 110 or more—whom we’ll meet in this book talk about having 
lived intense lives and working well into old age. 


A lot of sitting will age you 


In the Western world in particular, the rise in sedentary behavior has led to 
numerous diseases such as hypertension and obesity, which in turn affect 
longevity. 

Spending too much time seated at work or at home not only reduces muscular 
and respiratory fitness but also increases appetite and curbs the desire to 
participate in activities. Being sedentary can lead to hypertension, imbalanced 
eating, cardiovascular disease, osteoporosis, and even certain kinds of cancer. 
Recent studies have shown a connection between a lack of physical activity and 
the progressive distortion of telomeres in the immune system, which ages those 
cells and, in turn, the organism as a whole. 

This is a problem at all life stages, not only among adults. Sedentary children 
suffer from high rates of obesity and all its associated health issues and risks, 
which is why it’s so important to develop a healthy and active lifestyle at an early 
age. 

It’s easy to be less sedentary; it just takes a bit of effort and a few changes to 
your routine. We can access a more active lifestyle that makes us feel better 
inside and out—we just have to add a few ingredients to our everyday habits: 

■ Walk to work, or just go on a walk for at least twenty minutes each day. 

■ Use your feet instead of an elevator or escalator. This is good for your 
posture, your muscles, and your respiratory system, among other things. 

■ Participate in social or leisure activities so that you don’t spend too much time 
in front of the television. 

■ Replace your junk food with fruit and you’ll have less of an urge to snack, 
and more nutrients in your system. 

■ Get the right amount of sleep. Seven to nine hours is good, but any more than 
that makes us lethargic. 

■ Play with children or pets, or join a sports team. This not only strengthens the 
body but also stimulates the mind and boosts self-esteem. 

■ Be conscious of your daily routine in order to detect harmful habits and 
replace them with more positive ones. 

By making these small changes, we can begin to renew our bodies and minds 
and increase our life expectancy. 


A mArlnlV Knt'f I/nnf 


n muuci a utai'ivcjji acuci 

Though we age both externally and internally, both physically and mentally, one 
of the things that tell us the most about people’s age is their skin, which takes on 
different textures and colors according to processes going on beneath the surface. 
Most of those who make their living as models claim to sleep between nine and 
ten hours the night before a fashion show. This gives their skin a taut, wrinkle- 
free appearance and a healthy, radiant glow. 

Science has shown that sleep is a key antiaging tool, because when we sleep 
we generate melatonin, a hormone that occurs naturally in our bodies. The pineal 
gland produces it from the neurotransmitter serotonin according to our diurnal 
and nocturnal rhythms, and it plays a role in our sleep and waking cycles. 

A powerful antioxidant, melatonin helps us live longer, and also offers the 
following benefits: 

■ It strengthens the immune system. 

■ It contains an element that protects against cancer. 

■ It promotes the natural production of insulin. 

■ It slows the onset of Alzheimer’s disease. 

■ It helps prevent osteoporosis and fight heart disease. 

For all these reasons, melatonin is a great ally in preserving youth. It should be 
noted, however, that melatonin production decreases after age thirty. We can 
compensate for this by: 

■ Eating a balanced diet and getting more calcium. 

■ Soaking up a moderate amount of sun each day. 

■ Getting enough sleep. 

■ Avoiding stress, alcohol, tobacco, and caffeine, all of which make it harder 
to get a good night’s rest, depriving us of the melatonin we need. 

Experts are trying to determine whether artificially stimulating production of 
melatonin might help slow the aging process . . . which would confirm the theory 
that we already carry the secret to longevity within us. 


Antiaging attitudes 


The mind has tremendous power over the body and how quickly it ages. Most 
doctors agree that the secret to keeping the body young is keeping the mind active 
—a key element of ikigai —and in not caving in when we face difficulties 
throughout our lives. 

One study, conducted at Yeshiva University, found that the people who live 
the longest have two dispositional traits in common: a positive attitude and a high 
degree of emotional awareness. In other words, those who face challenges with a 
positive outlook and are able to manage their emotions are already well on their 
way toward longevity. 

A stoic attitude —serenity in the face of a setback—can also help keep you 
young, as it lowers anxiety and stress levels and stabilizes behavior. This can be 
seen in the greater life expectancies of certain cultures with unhurried, deliberate 
lifestyles. 

Many centenarians and supercentenarians have similar profiles: They have had 
full lives that were difficult at times, but they knew how to approach these 
challenges with a positive attitude and not be overwhelmed by the obstacles they 
faced. 

Alexander Imich, who in 2014 became the world’s oldest living man at age 
111, knew he had good genes but understood that other factors contributed, too: 
“The life you live is equally or more important for longevity,” he said in an 
interview with Reuters after being added to Guinness World Records in 2014. 


An ode to longevity 

During our stay in Ogimi, the village that holds the Guinness record for longevity, 
a woman who was about to turn 100 years old sang the following song for us in a 
mixture of Japanese and the local dialect: 

To keep healthy and have a long life, 

eat just a little of everything with relish, 

go to bed early, get up early, and then go out for a walk. 

We live each day with serenity and we enjoy the journey. 

To keep healthy and have a long life, 
we get on well with all of our friends. 

Spring, summer, fall, winter, 
we happily enjoy all the seasons. 


me secrei is 10 noi gei aisiraciea Dy now oia me lingers are; 
from the fingers to the head and back once again. 

If you keep moving with your fingers working, 100 years 
will come to you.* 


We can now use our fingers to turn the page to the next chapter, where we will 
look at the close relationship between longevity and discovering our life’s 
mission. 


FROM LOGOTHERAPY TO IKIGAI 

How to live longer and better by 
finding your purpose 



What is logotherapy? 

A colleague once asked Viktor Frankl to define his school of psychology in a 
single phrase, to which Frankl replied, “Well, in logotherapy the patient sits up 
straight and has to listen to things that are, on occasion, hard to hear.” The 
colleague had just described psychoanalysis to him in the following terms: “In 
psychoanalysis, the patient lies down on a couch and tells you things that are, on 
occasion, hard to say.” 

Frankl explains that one of the first questions he would ask his patients was 
“Why do you not commit suicide?” Usually the patient found good reasons not to, 
and was able to carry on. What, then, does logotherapy do? - 

The answer is pretty clear: It helps you find reasons to live. 

Logotherapy pushes patients to consciously discover their life’s purpose in 
order to confront their neuroses. Their quest to fulfill their destiny then motivates 
them to press forward, breaking the mental chains of the past and overcoming 
whatever obstacles they encounter along the way. 


Something to Live For 

A study conducted by Frankl in his Vienna clinic found that among both 
patients and personnel, around 80 percent believed that human beings 
needed a reason for living, and around 60 percent felt they had someone 
or something in their lives worth dying for- 


The search for meaning 

The search for purpose became a personal, driving force that allowed Frankl to 
achieve his goals. The process of logotherapy can be summarized in these five 
steps: 



1. A person feels empty, frustrated, or anxious. 

2. The therapist shows him that what he is feeling is the desire to have a 
meaningful life. 

3. The patient discovers his life’s purpose (at that particular point in time). 

4. Of his own free will, the patient decides to accept or reject that destiny. 

5. This newfound passion for life helps him overcome obstacles and sorrows. 

Frankl himself would live and die for his principles and ideals. His 
experiences as a prisoner at Auschwitz showed him that “Everything can be taken 
from a man but one thing: the last of the human freedoms—to choose one’s 
attitude in any given set of circumstances, to choose one’s own way.”- It was 
something he had to go through alone, without any help, and it inspired him for 
the rest of his life. 


Ten Differences Between Psychoanalysis and Logotherapy 

Psychoanalysis 

Logotherapy 

The patient reclines on a couch, like a patient. 

The patient sits facing the therapist, who guides him or her without 
passing judgment. 

Is retrospective: It looks to the past. 

Looks toward the future. 

Is introspective: It analyzes neuroses. 

Does not delve into the patient’s neuroses. 

The drive is toward pleasure. 

The drive is toward purpose and meaning. 

Centers on psychology. 

Includes a spiritual dimension. 

Works on psychogenic neuroses. 

Also works on noogenic, or existential, neuroses. 

Analyzes the unconscious origin of conflicts 
(instinctual dimension). 

Deals with conflicts when and where they arise (spiritual 
dimension). 

Limits itself to the patient’s instincts. 

Also deals with spiritual realities. 

Is fundamentally incompatible with faith. 

Is compatible with faith. 

Seeks to reconcile conflicts and satisfy impulses and 
instincts. 

Seeks to help the patient find meaning in his life and satisfy his 
moral principles. 


Fight for yourself 

Existential frustration arises when our life is without purpose, or when that 
purpose is skewed. In Frankl’s view, however, there is no need to see this 
frustration as an anomaly or a symptom of neurosis; instead, it can be a positive 




thing—a catalyst tor change. 

Logotherapy does not see this frustration as mental illness, the way other forms 
of therapy do, but rather as spiritual anguish —a natural and beneficial 
phenomenon that drives those who suffer from it to seek a cure, whether on their 
own or with the help of others, and in so doing to find greater satisfaction in life. 
It helps them change their own destiny. 

Logotherapy enters the picture if the person needs help doing this, if he needs 
guidance in discovering his life’s purpose and later in overcoming conflicts so he 
can keep moving toward his objective. In Man’s Search for Meaning, Frankl cites 
one of Nietzsche’s famous aphorisms: “He who has a why to live for can bear 
with almost any how.” 

Based on his own experience, Frankl believed that our health depends on that 
natural tension that comes from comparing what we’ve accomplished so far with 
what we’d like to achieve in the future. What we need, then, is not a peaceful 
existence, but a challenge we can strive to meet by applying all the skills at our 
disposal. 

Existential crisis, on the other hand, is typical of modern societies in which 
people do what they are told to do, or what others do, rather than what they want 
to do. They often try to fill the gap between what is expected of them and what 
they want for themselves with economic power or physical pleasure, or by 
numbing their senses. It can even lead to suicide. 

Sunday neurosis, for example, is what happens when, without the obligations 
and commitments of the workweek, the individual realizes how empty he is 
inside. He has to find a solution. Above all, he has to find his purpose, his reason 
for getting out of bed—his ikigai. 


“I Feel Empty Inside” 

In a study conducted at the Vienna Polyclinic Hospital, Frankl’s team 
found that 55 percent of the patients they interviewed were experiencing 
some degree of existential crisis.- 


According to logotherapy, discovering one’s purpose in life helps an individual 
fill that existential void. Frankl, a man who faced his problems and turned his 
objectives into actions, could look back on his life in peace as he grew old. He 



did not have to envy those still enjoying their youth, because he had amassed a 
broad set of experiences that showed he had lived for something. 


Better living through logotherapy: A few key ideas 

■ We don’t create the meaning of our life, as Sartre claimed—we discover it. 

■ We each have a unique reason for being, which can be adjusted or 
transformed many times over the years. 

■ Just as worry often brings about precisely the thing that was feared, 
excessive attention to a desire (or “hyper-intention”) can keep that desire 
from being fulfilled. 

■ Humor can help break negative cycles and reduce anxiety. 

■ We all have the capacity to do noble or terrible things. The side of the 
equation we end up on depends on our decisions, not on the condition in 
which we find ourselves. 

In the pages that follow, we will look at four cases from Frankl’s own practice 
in order to better understand the search for meaning and purpose. 


Case study: Viktor Frankl 

In German concentration camps, as in those that would later be built in Japan and 
Korea, psychiatrists confirmed that the prisoners with the greatest chance of 
survival were those who had things they wanted to accomplish outside the camp, 
those who felt a strong need to get out of there alive. This was true of Frankl, 
who, after being released and successfully developing the school of logotherapy, 
realized he had been the first patient of his own practice. 

Frankl had a goal to achieve, and it made him persevere. He arrived at 
Auschwitz carrying a manuscript that contained all the theories and research he 
had compiled over the course of his career, ready for publication. When it was 
confiscated, he felt compelled to write it all over again, and that need drove him 
and gave his life meaning amid the constant horror and doubt of the 
concentration camp—so much so that over the years, and especially when he fell 
ill with typhus, he would jot down fragments and key words from the lost work 
on any scrap of paper he found. 


Case study: The American diplomat 

An important North American diplomat went to Frankl to pick up where he left 
off with a course of treatment he had started five years earlier in the United 
States. When Frankl asked him why he’d started therapy in the first place, the 
diplomat answered that he hated his job and his country’s international policies, 
which he had to follow and enforce. His American psychoanalyst, whom he’d 
been seeing for years, insisted he make peace with his father so that his 
government and his job, both representations of the paternal figure, would seem 
less disagreeable. Frankl, however, showed him in just a few sessions that his 
frustration was due to the fact that he wanted to pursue a different career, and the 
diplomat concluded his treatment with that idea in mind. 

Five years later, the former diplomat informed Frankl that he had been 
working during that time in a different profession, and that he was happy. 

In Frankl’s view, the man not only didn’t need all those years of 
psychoanalysis, he also couldn’t even really be considered a “patient” in need of 
therapy. He was simply someone in search of a new life’s purpose; as soon as he 
found it, his life took on deeper meaning. 


Case study: The suicidal mother 

The mother of a boy who had died at age eleven was admitted to Frankl’s clinic 
after she tried to kill herself and her other son. It was this other son, paralyzed 
since birth, who kept her from carrying out her plan: He did believe his life had a 
purpose, and if his mother killed them both, it would keep him from achieving 
his goals. 

The woman shared her story in a group session. To help her, Frankl asked 
another woman to imagine a hypothetical situation in which she lay on her 
deathbed, old and wealthy but childless. The woman insisted that, in that case, she 
would have felt her life had been a failure. 

When the suicidal mother was asked to perform the same exercise, imagining 
herself on her deathbed, she looked back and realized that she had done 
everything in her power for her children—for both of them. She had given her 
paralyzed son a good life, and he had turned into a kind, reasonably happy person. 
To this she added, crying, “As for myself, I can look back peacefully on my life; 
for I can say my life was full of meaning, and I have tried hard to live it fully; I 
have done mv best—I have done mv best for mv son. Mv life was no failure!” 


In this way, by imagining herself on her deathbed and looking back, the 
suicidal mother found the meaning that, though she was not aware of it, her life 
already had. 


Case study: The grief-stricken doctor 

An elderly doctor, unable to overcome the deep depression into which he’d fallen 
after the death of his wife two years earlier, went to Frankl for help. 

Instead of giving him advice or analyzing his condition, Frankl asked him 
what would have happened if he had been the one who died first. The doctor, 
horrified, answered that it would have been terrible for his poor wife, that she 
would have suffered tremendously. To which Frankl responded, “You see, 
doctor? You have spared her all that suffering, but the price you have to pay for 
this is to survive, and mourn her.” 

The doctor didn’t say another word. He left Frankl’s office in peace, after 
taking the therapist’s hand in his own. He was able to tolerate the pain in place of 
his beloved wife. His life had been given a purpose. 


Morita therapy 

In the same decade that logotherapy came into being—a few years earlier, in fact 
—Shoma Morita created his own purpose-centered therapy, in Japan. It proved to 
be effective in the treatment of neurosis, obsessive-compulsive disorder, and 
posttraumatic stress. 

In addition to being a psychotherapist, Shoma Morita was a Zen Buddhist, and 
his therapy left a lasting spiritual mark on Japan. 

Many Western forms of therapy focus on controlling or modifying the 
patient’s emotions. In the West, we tend to believe that what we think influences 
how we feel, which in turn influences how we act. In contrast, Morita therapy 
focuses on teaching patients to accept their emotions without trying to control them , 
since their feelings will change as a result of their actions. 

In addition to accepting the patient’s emotions, Morita therapy seeks to 
“create” new emotions on the basis of actions. According to Morita, these 
emotions are learned through experience and repetition. 


Morita therapy is not meant to eliminate symptoms; instead it teaches us to 
accept our desires, anxieties, fears, and worries, and let them go. As Morita 
writes in his book Morita Therapy and the True Nature of Anxiety-Based 
Disorders, “In feelings, it is best to be wealthy and generous.” 

Morita explained the idea of letting go of negative feelings with the following 
fable: A donkey that is tied to a post by a rope will keep walking around the post 
in an attempt to free itself, only to become more immobilized and attached to the 
post. The same thing applies to people with obsessive thinking who become more 
trapped in their own suffering when they try to escape from their fears and 
discomfort.- 

The basic principles of Morita therapy 

1. Accept your feelings. If we have obsessive thoughts, we should not try to 
control them or get rid of them. If we do, they become more intense. Regarding 
human emotions, the Zen master would say, “If we try to get rid of one wave with 
another, we end up with an infinite sea.” We don’t create our feelings; they 
simply come to us, and we have to accept them. The trick is welcoming them. 
Morita likened emotions to the weather: We can’t predict or control them; we can 
only observe them. To this point, he often quoted the Vietnamese monk Thich 
Nhat Hanh, who would say, “Hello, solitude. How are you today? Come, sit with 
me, and I will care for you.”- 

2. Do what you should be doing. We shouldn’t focus on eliminating symptoms, 
because recovery will come on its own. We should focus instead on the present 
moment, and if we are suffering, on accepting that suffering. Above all, we 
should avoid intellectualizing the situation. The therapist’s mission is to develop 
the patient’s character so he or she can face any situation, and character is 
grounded in the things we do. Morita therapy does not offer its patients 
explanations, but rather allows them to learn from their actions and activities. It 
doesn’t tell you how to meditate, or how to keep a diary the way Western 
therapies do. It is up to the patient to make discoveries through experience. 

3. Discover your life’s purpose. We can’t control our emotions, but we can take 
charge of our actions every day. This is why we should have a clear sense of our 
purpose, and always keep Morita’s mantra in mind: “What do we need to be doing 
right now? What action should we be taking?” The key to achieving this is having 
dared to look inside yourself to find your ikigai. 


The four phases of Morita therapy 

Morita’s original treatment, which lasts fifteen to twenty-one days, consists of the 
following stages: 

1. Isolation and rest (five to seven days). During the first week of treatment, 
the patient rests in a room without any external stimuli. No television, books, 
family, friends, or speaking. All the patient has is his thoughts. He lies down for 
most of the day and is visited regularly by the therapist, who tries to avoid 
interacting with him as much as possible. The therapist simply advises the patient 
to continue observing the rise and fall of his emotions as he lies there. When the 
patient gets bored and wants to start doing things again, he is ready to move on to 
the next stage of therapy. 

2. Light occupational therapy (five to seven days). In this stage, the patient 
performs repetitive tasks in silence. One of these is keeping a diary about his 
thoughts and feelings. The patient goes outside after a week of being shut in, 
takes walks in nature, and does breathing exercises. He also starts doing simple 
activities, such as gardening, drawing, or painting. During this stage, the patient is 
still not allowed to talk to anyone, except the therapist. 

3. Occupational therapy (five to seven days). In this stage, the patient performs 
tasks that require physical movement. Dr. Morita liked to take his patients to the 
mountains to chop wood. In addition to physical tasks, the patient is also 
immersed in other activities, such as writing, painting, or making ceramics. The 
patient can speak with others at this stage, but only about the tasks at hand. 

4. The return to social life and the “real” world. The patient leaves the hospital 
and is reintroduced to social life, but maintains the practices of meditation and 
occupational therapy developed during treatment. The idea is to reenter society as 
a new person, with a sense of purpose, and without being controlled by social or 
emotional pressures. 


Naikan meditation 

Morita was a great Zen master of Naikan introspective meditation. Much of his 
therapy draws on his knowledge and mastery of this school, which centers on 
three questions the individual must ask him-or herself: 


1. What have I received from person X? 

2. What have I given to person X? 

3. What problems have I caused person X? 

Through these reflections, we stop identifying others as the cause of our 
problems and deepen our own sense of responsibility. As Morita said, “If you are 
angry and want to fight, think about it for three days before coming to blows. 
After three days, the intense desire to fight will pass on its own.”- 


And now, ikigai 

Logotherapy and Morita therapy are both grounded in a personal, unique 
experience that you can access without therapists or spiritual retreats: the mission 
of finding your ikigai, your existential fuel. Once you find it, it is only a matter of 
having the courage and making the effort to stay on the right path. 

In the following chapters, we’ll take a look at the basic tools you’ll need to get 
moving along that path: finding flow in the tasks you’ve chosen to do, eating in a 
balanced and mindful way, doing low-intensity exercise, and learning not to give 
in when difficulties arise. In order to do this, you have to accept that the world— 
like the people who live in it—is imperfect, but that it is still full of opportunities 
for growth and achievement. 

Are you ready to throw yourself into your passion as if it were the most 
important thing in the world? 



FIND FLOW IN EVERYTHING YOU DO 

How to turn work and free time 
into spaces for growth 



We are what we repeatedly do. 

Excellence, then, is not an act but a habit. 

—Aristotle 


Going with the flow 

Imagine you are skiing down one of your favorite slopes. Powdery snow flies up 
on both sides of you like white sand. Conditions are perfect. 

You are entirely focused on skiing as well as you can. You know exactly how 
to move at each moment. There is no future, no past. There is only the present. 

You feel the snow, your skis, your body, and your consciousness united as a 
single entity. You are completely immersed in the experience, not thinking about or 
distracted by anything else. Your ego dissolves, and you become part of what you 
are doing. 

This is the kind of experience Bruce Lee described with his famous “Be water, 
my friend.” 

We’ve all felt our sense of time vanish when we lose ourselves in an activity 
we enjoy. We start cooking and before we know it, several hours have passed. 

We spend an afternoon with a book and forget about the world going by until we 
notice the sunset and realize we haven’t eaten dinner. We go surfing and don’t 
realize how many hours we have spent in the water until the next day, when our 
muscles ache. 

The opposite can also happen. When we have to complete a task we don’t want 
to do, every minute feels like a lifetime and we can’t stop looking at our watch. 

As the quip attributed to Einstein goes, “Put your hand on a hot stove for a 
minute and it seems like an hour. Sit with a pretty girl for an hour, and it seems 
like a minute. That is relativity.” 

The funny thing is that someone else might really enjoy the same task, but we 
want to finish as quickly as possible. 

What makes us enjoy doing something so much that we forget about whatever 
worries we might have while we do it? When are we happiest? These questions 
can help us discover our ikigai. 


The power of flow 

These questions are also at the heart of psychologist Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi’s 
research into the experience of being completely immersed in what we are doing. 
Csikszentmihalyi called this state “flow,” and described it as the pleasure, delight, 
creativity, and process when we are completely immersed in life. 

There is no magic recipe for finding happiness, for living according to your 
ikigai, but one key ingredient is the ability to reach this state of flow and, through 
this state, to have an “optimal experience.” 

In order to achieve this optimal experience, we have to focus on increasing the 
time we spend on activities that bring us to this state of flow, rather than allowing 
ourselves to get caught up in activities that offer immediate pleasure—like eating 
too much, abusing drugs or alcohol, or stuffing ourselves with chocolate in front 
of the TV. 

As Csikszentmihalyi asserts in his book Flow: The Psychology of Optimal 
Experience, flow is “the state in which people are so involved in an activity that 
nothing else seems to matter; the experience itself is so enjoyable that people will 
do it even at great cost, for the sheer sake of doing it.” 

It is not only creative professionals who require the high doses of 
concentration that promote flow. Most athletes, chess players, and engineers also 
spend much of their time on activities that bring them to this state. 

According to Csikszentmihalyi’s research, a chess player feels the same way 
upon entering a state of flow as a mathematician working on a formula or a 
surgeon performing an operation. A professor of psychology, Csikszentmihalyi 
analyzed data from people around the world and discovered that flow is the same 
among individuals of all ages and cultures. In New York and Okinawa, we all 
reach a state of flow in the same way. 

But what happens to our mind when we are in that state? 

When we flow, we are focused on a concrete task without any distractions. 

Our mind is “in order.” The opposite occurs when we try to do something while 
our mind is on other things. 

If you often find yourself losing focus while working on something you 
consider important, there are several strategies you can employ to increase your 
chances of achieving flow. 


The Seven Conditions for Achieving Flow 


A 


r«- 4-y-v -*»/-», 


I/-»I&gt; /-»C /-«I&gt; /~V-P I I J /--» ! « 1 T T 1 


I 1 4-t t 4 - 1 % /"* 


/^uuuiumg iu icf&gt;caiuiici uwcii ouiicuici ui L/craui umveisiiy, me 

requirements for achieving flow are: 

1. Knowing what to do 

2. Knowing how to do it 

3. Knowing how well you are doing 

4. Knowing where to go (where navigation is involved) 

5. Perceiving significant challenges 

6. Perceiving significant skills 

7. Being free from distractions- 


Strategy 1: Choose a difficult task (but not too 
difficult!) 

Schaffer’s model encourages us to take on tasks that we have a chance of 
completing but that are slightly outside our comfort zone. 

Every task, sport, or job has a set of rules, and we need a set of skills to follow 
them. If the rules for completing a task or achieving a purpose are too basic 
relative to our skill set, we will likely get bored. Activities that are too easy lead 
to apathy. 

If, on the other hand, we assign ourselves a task that is too difficult, we won’t 
have the skills to complete it and will almost certainly give up—and feel 
frustrated, to boot. 

The ideal is to find a middle path, something aligned with our abilities but just 
a bit of a stretch, so we experience it as a challenge. This is what Ernest 
Hemingway meant when he said, “Sometimes I write better than I can.’ - 

We want to see challenges through to the end because we enjoy the feeling of 
pushing ourselves. Bertrand Russell expressed a similar idea when he said, “To be 
able to concentrate for a considerable amount of time is essential to difficult 
achievement.”- 

If you’re a graphic designer, learn a new software program for your next 
project. If you’re a programmer, use a new programming language. If you’re a 
dancer, try to incorporate into your next routine a movement that has seemed 
impossible for years. 

Add a little something extra, something that takes you out of your comfort 



zone. 


Even doing something as simple as reading means following certain rules, 
having certain abilities and knowledge. If we set out to read a book on quantum 
mechanics for specialists in physics without being specialists in physics ourselves, 
we’ll probably give up after a few minutes. On the other end of the spectrum, if 
we already know everything a book has to tell us, we’ll get bored right away. 

However, if the book is appropriate to our knowledge and abilities, and builds 
on what we already know, we’ll immerse ourselves in our reading, and time will 
flow. This pleasure and satisfaction are evidence that we are in tune with our 
ikigai. 


Easy 

Challenging 

Beyond Our Abilities 

Boredom 

Flow 

Anxiety 


Strategy 2: Have a clear, concrete objective 

Video games—played in moderation—board games, and sports are great ways to 
achieve flow, because the objective tends to be very clear: Beat your rival or your 
own record while following a set of explicitly defined rules. 

Unfortunately, the objective isn’t quite as clear in most situations. 

According to a study by Boston Consulting Group, when asked about their 
bosses, the number one complaint of employees at multinational corporations is 
that they don’t “communicate the team’s mission clearly,” and that, as a result, the 
employees don’t know what their objectives are. 

What often happens, especially in big companies, is that the executives get lost 
in the details of obsessive planning, creating strategies to hide the fact that they 
don’t have a clear objective. It’s like heading out to sea with a map but no 
destination. 

It is much more important to have a compass pointing to a concrete objective 
than to have a map. Joi Ito, director of the MIT Media Lab, encourages us to use 
the principle of “compass over maps” as a tool to navigate our world of 
uncertainty. In the book Whiplash: How to Survive Our Faster Future , he and Jeff 
Howe write, “In an increasingly unpredictable world moving ever more quickly, a 
detailed map may lead you deep into the woods at an unnecessarily high cost. A 
good compass, though, will always take you where you need to go. It doesn’t 
mean that you should start your journey without any idea where you’re going. 








What it does mean is understanding that while the path to your goal may not be 
straight, you’ll finish faster and more efficiently than you would have if you had 
trudged along a preplanned route.” 

In business, the creative professions, and education alike, it’s important to 
reflect on what we hope to achieve before starting to work, study, or make 
something. We should ask ourselves questions such as: 

■ What is my objective for today’s session in the studio? 

■ How many words am I going to write today for the article coming out next 
month? 

■ What is my team’s mission? 

■ How fast will I set the metronome tomorrow in order to play that sonata at 
an allegro tempo by the end of the week? 

Having a clear objective is important in achieving flow, but we also have to 
know how to leave it behind when we get down to business. Once the journey has 
begun, we should keep this objective in mind without obsessing over it. 

When Olympic athletes compete for a gold medal, they can’t stop to think how 
pretty the medal is. They have to be present in the moment—they have t o flow. If 
they lose focus for a second, thinking how proud they’ll be to show the medal to 
their parents, they’ll almost certainly commit an error at a critical moment and 
will not win the competition. 

One common example of this is writer’s block. Imagine that a writer has to 
finish a novel in three months. The objective is clear; the problem is that the 
writer can’t stop obsessing over it. Every day she wakes up thinking, “I have to 
write that novel,” and every day she sets about reading the newspaper and 
cleaning the house. Every evening she feels frustrated and promises she’ll get to 
work the next day. 

Days, weeks, and months pass, and the writer still hasn’t gotten anything down 
on the page, when all it would have taken was to sit down and get that first word 
out, then the second ... to flow with the project, expressing her ikigai. 

As soon as you take these first small steps, your anxiety will disappear and you 
will achieve a pleasant flow in the activity you’re doing. Getting back to Albert 
Einstein, “a happy man is too satisfied with the present to dwell on the future.”- 


Vague Objective 

Clearly Defined Objective and a 
Focus on Process 

Obsessive Desire to Achieve a Goal 

While Ignoring Process 

r ■ j , 


. _ _ a . , 








cmm usion, Lime auu energy wasieu uii 
meaningless tasks 

Flow 

rixauon uii me oujecuve lamer man gening 

down to business 

Mental block 

Flow 

Mental block 


Strategy 3: Concentrate on a single task 

This is perhaps one of the greatest obstacles we face today, with so much 
technology and so many distractions. We’re listening to a video on YouTube 
while writing an e-mail, when suddenly a chat prompt pops up and we answer it. 
Then our smartphone vibrates in our pocket; just as soon as we respond to that 
message, we’re back at our computer, logging on to Facebook. 

Pretty soon thirty minutes have passed, and we’ve forgotten what the e-mail 
we were writing was supposed to be about. 

This also happens sometimes when we put on a movie with dinner and don’t 
realize how delicious the salmon was until we’re taking the last bite. 

We often think that combining tasks will save us time, but scientific evidence 
shows that it has the opposite effect. Even those who claim to be good at 
multitasking are not very productive. In fact, they are some of the least 
productive people. 

Our brains can take in millions of bits of information but can only actually 
process a few dozen per second. When we say we’re multitasking, what we’re 
really doing is switching back and forth between tasks very quickly. 
Unfortunately, we’re not computers adept at parallel processing. We end up 
spending all our energy alternating between tasks, instead of focusing on doing 
one of them well. 

Concentrating on one thing at a time may be the single most important factor in 
achieving flow. 

According to Csikszentmihalyi, in order to focus on a task we need: 

1. To be in a distraction-free environment 

2. To have control over what we are doing at every moment 

Technology is great, if we’re in control of it. It’s not so great if it takes control 
of us. For example, if you have to write a research paper, you might sit down at 
your computer and use Google to look up the information you need. However, if 
you’re not very disciplined, you might end up surfing the Web instead of writing 
that naner. In that case. Google and the Internet will have taken over, nulling vou 



CP J 


out of your state of flow. 

It has been scientifically shown that if we continually ask our brains to switch 
back and forth between tasks, we waste time, make more mistakes, and 
remember less of what we’ve done. 

Several studies conducted at Stanford University by Clifford Ivar Nass 
describe our generation as suffering from an epidemic of multitasking. One such 
study analyzed the behavior of hundreds of students, dividing them into groups 
based on the number of things they tended to do at once. The students who were 
the most addicted to multitasking typically alternated among more than four 
tasks; for example, taking notes while reading a textbook, listening to a podcast, 
answering messages on their smartphone, and sometimes checking their Twitter 
timeline. 

Each group of students was shown a screen with several red and several blue 
arrows. The objective of the exercise was to count the red arrows. 

At first, all the students answered correctly right away, without much trouble. 
As the number of blue arrows increased (the number of red arrows stayed the 
same; only their position changed), however, the students accustomed to 
multitasking had serious trouble counting the red arrows in the time allotted, or as 
quickly as the students who did not habitually multitask, for one very simple 
reason: They got distracted by the blue arrows! Their brains were trained to pay 
attention to every stimulus, regardless of its importance, while the brains of the 
other students were trained to focus on a single task—in this case, counting the 
red arrows and ignoring the blue ones.- 

Other studies indicate that working on several things at once lowers our 
productivity by at least 60 percent and our IQ by more than ten points. 

One study funded by the Swedish Council for Working Life and Social 
Research found that a sample group of more than four thousand young adults 
between the ages of twenty and twenty-four who were addicted to their 
smartphones got less sleep, felt less connected to their community at school, and 
were more likely to show signs of depression.- 


Concentrating on a Single Task 

Multitasking 

Makes achieving flow more likely 

Makes achieving flow impossible 

Increases productivity 

Decreases productivity by 60 percent (though it doesn’t seem to) 

Increases our power of retention 

Makes it harder to remember things 

Makes us less likely to make mistakes 

Makes us more likely to make mistakes 








Helps us feel calm and in control of the task at 
hand 

Makes us feel stressed by the sensation that we’re losing control, that our 
tasks are controlling us 

Causes us to become more considerate as we 
pay full attention to those around us 

Causes us to hurt those around us through our “addiction” to stimuli: 
always checking our phones, always on social media . . . 

Increases creativity 

Reduces creativity 


What can we do to avoid falling victim to this flow-impeding epidemic? How 
can we train our brains to focus on a single task? Here are a few ideas for 
creating a space and time free of distractions, to increase our chances of reaching 
a state of flow and thereby getting in touch with our ikigai: 

■ Don’t look at any kind of screen for the first hour you’re awake and the last 
hour before you go to sleep. 

■ Turn off your phone before you achieve flow. There is nothing more 
important than the task you have chosen to do during this time. If this seems 
too extreme, enable the “do not disturb” function so only the people closest 
to you can contact you in case of emergency. 

■ Designate one day of the week, perhaps a Saturday or Sunday, a day of 
technological “fasting,” making exceptions only for e-readers (without Wi¬ 
Fi) or MP3 players. 

■ Go to a cafe that doesn’t have Wi-Fi. 

■ Read and respond to e-mail only once or twice per day. Define those times 
clearly and stick to them. 

■ Try the Pomodoro Technique: Get yourself a kitchen timer (some are made 
to look like a pomodoro, or tomato) and commit to working on a single task 
as long as it’s running. The Pomodoro Technique recommends 25 minutes of 
work and 5 minutes of rest for each cycle, but you can also do 50 minutes of 
work and 10 minutes of rest. Find the pace that’s best for you; the most 
important thing is to be disciplined in completing each cycle. 

■ Start your work session with a ritual you enjoy and end it with a reward. 

■ Train your mind to return to the present when you find yourself getting 
distracted. Practice mindfulness or another form of meditation, go for a 
walk or a swim—whatever will help you get centered again. 

■ Work in a space where you will not be distracted. If you can’t do this at 
home, go to a library, a cafe, or, if your task involves playing the saxophone, 
a music studio. If you find that your surroundings continue to distract you, 
keep looking until you find the right place. 




■ Divide each activity into groups of related tasks, and assign each group its 
own place and time. For example, if you’re writing a magazine article, you 
could do research and take notes at home in the morning, write in the library 
in the afternoon, and edit on the couch at night. 

■ Bundle routine tasks—such as sending out invoices, making phone calls, and 
so on—and do them all at once. 


Advantages of Flow 

Disadvantages of Distraction 

A focused mind 

A wandering mind 

Living in the present 

Thinking about the past and the future 

We are free from worry 

Concerns about our daily life and the people around us 
invade our thoughts 

The hours fly by 

Every minute seems endless 

We feel in control 

We lose control and fail to complete the task at hand, or 
other tasks or people keep us from our work 

We prepare thoroughly 

We act without being prepared 

We know what we should be doing at any given moment 

We frequently get stuck and don’t know how to proceed 

Our mind is clear and overcomes all obstacles to the flow of 
thought 

We are plagued by doubts, concerns, and low self-esteem 

It’s pleasant 

It’s boring and exhausting 

Our ego fades: We are not the ones controlling the activity or 
task we’re doing—the task is leading us 

Constant self-criticism: Our ego is present and we feel 
frustrated 


Flow in Japan: Takumis, engineers, geniuses, and otakus 

What do takumis (artisans), engineers, inventors, and otakus (fans of anime and 
manga) have in common? They all understand the importance of flowing with 
their ikigai at all times. 

One widespread stereotype about people in Japan is that they’re exceptionally 
dedicated and hardworking, even though some Japanese people say they look like 
they’re working harder than they really are. There is no doubt, though, about their 
ability to be completely absorbed in a task, or about their perseverance when 
there is a problem to be solved. One of the first words one learns when starting 
Japanese lessons is ganbaru , which means “to persevere” or “to stay firm by doing 
one’s best.” 




Japanese people often apply themselves to even the most basic tasks with an 
intensity that borders on obsession. We see this in all kinds of contexts, from the 
“retirees” taking meticulous care of their rice fields in the mountains of Nagano 
to the college students working the weekend shift in convenience stores known as 
konbinis. If you go to Japan, you’ll experience this attention to detail firsthand in 
almost every transaction. 

Walk into one of the stores that sell handcrafted objects in Naha, Kanazawa, 
or Kyoto and you’ll also discover that Japan is a treasure trove of traditional 
craftwork. The people of Japan have a unique talent for creating new 
technologies while preserving artisanal traditions and techniques. 


The art of the takumi 

Toyota employs “artisans” who are able to make a certain type of screw by hand. 
These takumi, or experts in a particular manual skill, are extremely important to 
Toyota, and they are hard to replace. Some of them are the only people who 
know how to perform their exact skill, and it doesn’t seem as though a new 
generation is going to take up the mantle. 

Turntable needles are another example: They’re produced almost exclusively 
in Japan, where you can find the last remaining people who know how to use the 
machinery required to make these precision needles, and who are trying to pass 
on their knowledge to their descendants. 

We met a takumi on a visit to Kumano, a small town near Hiroshima. We were 
there for the day, working on a photo essay for one of the most famous brands of 
makeup brushes in the West. The billboard welcoming visitors to Kumano shows 
a mascot holding a large brush. In addition to the brush factories, the town is full 
of little houses and vegetable gardens; heading farther in, you can see several 
Shinto shrines at the base of the mountains that surround the town. 

We spent hours taking photos in factories full of people in orderly rows, each 
doing a single task—such as painting the handles of the brushes or loading boxes 
of them onto trucks—before we realized we still hadn’t seen anyone actually 
putting bristles into the brush heads. 

After we asked about this and got the runaround several times, the president 
of one company agreed to show us how it was done. He led us out of the building 
and asked us to get into his car. After a five-minute drive we parked next to 
another, smaller structure and climbed the stairs. He opened a door and we 

11mfrv o email mrvm -fill^rl \ui tU tUot 1 m Im^pKz nafura 1 linTit 


VV CilJVV^Va 111LV/ Cl &gt;3±±1CI±± 1 UVJill IJLlll^Va VV1LJL1 VV lllUU VV O LJLJLCIL IV^t 111 1U V V^IJ licit 111 Cll ±±£,111. 

In the middle of the room was a woman wearing a mask. You could see only 
her eyes. She was so focused on choosing individual bristles for the brushes— 
gracefully moving her hands and fingers, using scissors and combs to sort the 
bristles—that she didn’t even notice our presence. Her movements were so quick 
it was hard to tell what she was doing. 

The president of the company interrupted her to let her know that we’d be 
taking photos as she worked. We couldn’t see her mouth, but the glint in her eye 
and the cheerful inflection in her speech let us know she was smiling. She looked 
happy and proud talking about her work and responsibilities. 

We had to use extremely fast shutter speeds to capture her movements. Her 
hands danced and flowed in concert with her tools and the bristles she was 
sorting. 

The president told us that this takumi was one of the most important people in 
the company, even though she was hidden away in a separate building. Every 
bristle of every brush the company made passed through her hands. 


Steve Jobs in Japan 

Apple cofounder Steve Jobs was a big fan of Japan. Not only did he visit the Sony 
factories in the 1980s and adopt many of their methods when he founded Apple, 
he was also captivated by the simplicity and quality of Japanese porcelain in 
Kyoto. 

It was not, however, an artisan from Kyoto who won Steve Jobs’s devotion, but 
rather a takumi from Toyama named Yukio Shakunaga, who used a technique 
called Etchu Seto-yaki, known by only a few. 

On a visit to Kyoto, Jobs heard of an exhibition of Shakunaga’s work. He 
immediately understood that there was something special about Shakunaga’s 
porcelain. As a matter of fact, he bought several cups, vases, and plates, and went 
back to the show three times that week. 

Jobs returned to Kyoto several times over the course of his life in search of 
inspiration, and ended up meeting Shakunaga in person. It is said that Jobs had 
many questions for him—almost all of them about the fabrication process and the 
type of porcelain he used. 

Shakunaga explained that he used white porcelain he extracted himself from 
mountains in the Toyama prefecture, making him the only artist of his ilk 


familiar with the fabrication process of porcelain objects from their origins in the 
mountains to their final form—an authentic takumi. 

Jobs was so impressed that he considered going to Toyama to see the mountain 
where Shakunaga got his porcelain, but thought better of it when he heard that it 
was more than four hours by train from Kyoto. 

In an interview after Jobs’s death, Shakunaga said he was very proud that his 
work had been appreciated by the man who created the iPhone. He added that 
Jobs’s last purchase from him had been a set of twelve teacups. Jobs had asked 
for something special, “a new style.” To satisfy this request, Shakunaga made 150 
teacups in the process of testing out new ideas. Of these, he chose the twelve best 
and sent them to the Jobs family. 

Ever since his first trip to Japan, Jobs was fascinated and inspired by the 
country’s artisans, engineers (especially at Sony), philosophy (especially Zen), and 
cuisine (especially sushi).- 


Sophisticated simplicity 

What do Japanese artisans, engineers, Zen philosophy, and cuisine have in 
common? Simplicity and attention to detail. It is not a lazy simplicity but a 
sophisticated one that searches out new frontiers, always taking the object, the 
body and mind, or the cuisine to the next level, according to one’s ikigai. 

As Csikszentmihalyi would say, the key is always having a meaningful 
challenge to overcome in order to maintain flow. 

The documentary Jiro Dreams of Sushi gives us another example of a takumi, 
this time in the kitchen. Its protagonist has been making sushi every day for more 
than eighty years, and owns a small sushi restaurant near the Ginza subway station 
in Tokyo. He and his son go every day to the famous Tsukiji fish market and 
choose the best fish to bring back to the restaurant. 

In the documentary, we see one of Jiro’s apprentices learning to make tamago 
(a thin, slightly sweet omelet). No matter how hard he tries, he can’t get Jiro’s 
approval. He keeps practicing for years until he finally does. 

Why does the apprentice refuse to give up? Doesn’t he get bored cooking eggs 
every day? No, because making sushi is his ikigai, too. 

Both Jiro and his son are culinary artists. They don’t get bored when they cook 
—they achieve a state of flow. They enjoy themselves completely when they are 


in the kitchen; that is their happiness, their ikigai. They’ve learned to take 
pleasure in their work, to lose their sense of time. 

Beyond the close relationship between father and son, which helps them keep 
the challenge going each day, they also work in a quiet, peaceful environment that 
allows them to concentrate. Even after receiving a three-star rating from 
Michelin, they never considered opening other locations or expanding the 
business. They serve just ten patrons at a time at the bar of their small restaurant. 
Jiro’s family isn’t looking to make money; instead they value good working 
conditions and creating an environment in which they can flow while making the 
best sushi in the world. 

Jiro, like Yukio Shakunaga, begins his work at “the source.” He goes to the 
fish market to find the best tuna; Shakunaga goes to the mountains to find the 
best porcelain. When they get down to work, both become one with the object 
they are creating. This unity with the object that they reach in a state of flow 
takes on special meaning in Japan, where, according to Shintoism, forests, trees, 
and objects have a kami (spirit or god) within them. 

When someone—whether an artist, an engineer, or a chef—sets out to create 
something, his or her responsibility is to use nature to give it “life” while 
respecting that nature at every moment. During this process, the artisan becomes 
one with the object and flows with it. An ironworker would say that metal has a 
life of its own, just as someone making ceramics would say that the clay does. 

The Japanese are skilled at bringing nature and technology together: not man 
versus nature, but rather a union of the two. 


The purity of Ghibli 

There are those who say that the Shinto value of being connected with nature is 
vanishing. One of the harshest critics of this loss is another artist with a clearly 
defined ikigai : Hayao Miyazaki, the director of the animated films produced by 
Studio Ghibli. 

In nearly all his films we see humans, technology, fantasy, and nature in a state 
of conflict—and, in the end, coming together. One of the most poignant 
metaphors in his film Spirited Away is an obese spirit covered in trash that 
represents the pollution of the rivers. 

In Miyazaki’s films, forests have personalities, trees have feelings, and robots 
befriend birds. Considered a national treasure by the Japanese government, 


Miyazaki is an artist capable of becoming completely absorbed in his art. He uses 
a cell phone from the late 1990s, and he makes his entire team draw by hand. He 
“directs” his films by rendering on paper even the tiniest detail, achieving flow by 
drawing, not by using a computer. Thanks to this obsession on the director’s part, 
Studio Ghibli is one of the only studios in the world where almost the entire 
production process is carried out using traditional techniques. 

Those who have visited Studio Ghibli know that it is fairly typical, on a given 
Sunday to see a solitary individual tucked away in a corner, hard at work—a man 
in simple clothes who will greet them with an ohayo (hello) without looking up. 

Miyazaki is so passionate about his work that he spends many Sundays in the 
studio, enjoying the state of flow, putting his ikigai above all else. Visitors know 
that under no circumstances is one to bother Miyazaki, who is known for his 
quick temper—especially if he is interrupted while drawing. 

In 2013, Miyazaki announced he was going to retire. To commemorate his 
retirement, the television station NHK made a documentary showing him in his 
last days at work. He is drawing in nearly every scene of the film. In one scene, 
several of his colleagues are seen coming out of a meeting, and there he is, 
drawing in a corner, paying no attention to them. In another scene, he is shown 
walking to work on December 30 (a national holiday in Japan) and opening the 
doors of Studio Ghibli so he can spend the day there, drawing alone. 

Miyazaki can’t stop drawing. The day after his “retirement,” instead of going 
on vacation or staying at home, he went to Studio Ghibli and sat down to draw. 
His colleagues put on their best poker faces, not knowing what to say. One year 
later, he announced he wouldn’t make any more feature films but that he would 
keep on drawing until the day he died. 

Can someone really retire if he is passionate about what he does? 


The recluses 

It is not only the Japanese who have this capacity; there are artists and scientists 
all over the world with strong, clear ikigais. They do what they love until their 
dying day. 

The last thing Einstein wrote before closing his eyes forever was a formula 
that attempted to unite all the forces of the universe in a single theory. When he 
died, he was still doing what he loved. If he hadn’t been a physicist, he said, he 
would have been happy as a musician. When he wasn’t focused on physics or 


mathematics, he enjoyed playing the violin. Reaching a state of flow while 
working on his formulas or playing music, his two ikigais, brought him endless 
pleasure. 

Many such artists might seem misanthropic or reclusive, but what they are 
really doing is protecting the time that brings them happiness, sometimes at the 
expense of other aspects of their lives. They are outliers who apply the principles 
of flow to their lives to an extreme. 

Another example of this kind of artist is the novelist Haruki Murakami. He 
sees only a close circle of friends, and appears in public in Japan only once every 
few years. 

Artists know how important it is to protect their space, control their 
environment, and be free of distractions if they want to flow with their ikigai. 


Microflow: Enjoying mundane tasks 

But what happens when we have to, say, do the laundry, mow the lawn, or attend 
to paperwork? Is there a way to make these mundane tasks enjoyable? 

Near the Shinjuku subway station, in one of the neural centers of Tokyo, there 
is a supermarket that still employs elevator operators. The elevators are fairly 
standard and could easily be operated by the customers, but the store prefers to 
provide the service of someone holding the door open for you, pushing the button 
for your floor, and bowing as you exit. 

If you ask around, you’ll leam that there is one elevator operator who has been 
doing the same job since 2004. She is always smiling and enthusiastic about her 
work. How is she able to enjoy such a job? Doesn’t she get bored doing 
something so repetitive? 

On closer inspection, it becomes clear that the elevator operator is not just 
pushing buttons but is instead performing a whole sequence of movements. She 
begins by greeting the customers with a songlike salutation followed by a bow and 
a welcoming wave of the hand. Then she presses the elevator button with a 
graceful movement, as though she is a geisha offering a client a cup of tea. 

Csikszentmihalyi calls this microflow. 

We’ve all been bored in a class or at a conference and started doodling to keep 
ourselves entertained. Or whistled while painting a wall. If we’re not truly being 
challenged, we get bored and add a layer of complexity to amuse ourselves. Our 
ability to turn routine tasks into moments of microflow, into something we enjoy, 

ic Vai/ tn Anr Koinrr Vionm? cinop oil u oi7P Ia r\r\ ciiaIi tocVc 


Id 1YV/J IU V/UI LJV^llJLg, JLJLCippj , OlllV^V^ VV Y/ Clll HCi V V-/ IU KXKJ OLIV^JLI LCl&gt;3JYk3. 

Even Bill Gates washes the dishes every night. He says he enjoys it—that it 
helps him relax and clear his mind, and that he tries to do it a little better each 
day, following an established order or set of rules he’s made for himself: plates 
first, forks second, and so on. 

It’s one of his daily moments of microflow. 

Richard Feynman, one of the most important physicists of all time, also took 
pleasure in routine tasks. W. Daniel Hillis, one of the founders of the 
supercomputer manufacturer Thinking Machines, hired Feynman to work on the 
development of a computer that could handle parallel processing when he was 
already world famous. He says Feynman showed up on his first day of work and 
said, “OK, boss, what’s my assignment?” They didn’t have anything prepared, so 
they asked him to work on a certain mathematical problem. He immediately 
realized they were giving him an irrelevant task to keep him busy and said, “That 
sounds like a bunch of baloney—give me something real to do.” 

So they sent him to a nearby shop to buy office supplies, and he completed his 
assignment with a smile on his face. When he didn’t have something important to 
do or needed to rest his mind, Feynman dedicated himself to microflowing—say, 
painting the office walls. 

Weeks later, after visiting the Thinking Machines offices a group of investors 
declared, “You have a Nobel laureate in there painting walls and soldering 
circuits. 


Instant vacations: Getting there through meditation 

Training the mind can get us to a place of flow more quickly. Meditation is one 
way to exercise our mental muscles. 

There are many types of meditation, but they all have the same objective: 
calming the mind, observing our thoughts and emotions, and centering our focus 
on a single object. 

The basic practice involves sitting with a straight back and focusing on your 
breath. Anyone can do it, and you feel a difference after just one session. By 
fixing your attention on the air moving in and out of your nose, you can slow the 
torrent of thoughts and clear your mental horizons. 


The Archer’s Secret 



The winner of the 1988 Olympic gold medal for archery was a seventeen- 
year-old woman from South Korea. When asked how she prepared, she 
replied that the most important part of her training was meditating for two 
hours each day. 


If we want to get better at reaching a state of flow, meditation is an excellent 
antidote to our smartphones and their notifications constantly clamoring for our 
attention. 

One of the most common mistakes among people starting to meditate is 
worrying about doing it “right,” achieving absolute mental silence, or reaching 
“nirvana.” The most important thing is to focus on the journey. 

Since the mind is a constant swirl of thoughts, ideas, and emotions, slowing 
down the “centrifuge”—even for just a few seconds—can help us feel more 
rested and leave us with a sense of clarity. 

In fact, one of the things we learn in the practice of meditation is not to worry 
about anything that flits across our mental screen. The idea of killing our boss 
might flash into our mind, but we simply label it as a thought and let it pass like a 
cloud, without judging or rejecting it. It is only a thought—one of the sixty 
thousand we have every day, according to some experts. 

Meditation generates alpha and theta brain waves. For those experienced in 
meditation, these waves appear right away, while it might take a half hour for a 
beginner to experience them. These relaxing brain waves are the ones that are 
activated right before we fall asleep, as we lie in the sun, or right after taking a 
hot bath. 

We all carry a spa with us everywhere we go. It’s just a matter of knowing how 
to get in—something anyone can do, with a bit of practice. 


Humans as ritualistic beings 

Life is inherently ritualistic. We could argue that humans naturally follow rituals 
that keep us busy. In some modem cultures, we have been forced out of our 
ritualistic lives to pursue goal after goal in order to be seen as successful. But 
throughout history, humans have always been busy. We were hunting, cooking, 
farming, exploring, and raising families—activities that were structured as rituals 
to keep us busy throughout our days. 


-c *11 


-1 _ *1 


IT 


.1 1 





mil in an unusual way, rnuais sun permeaie aany lire ana Dusmess pracuces in 
modern Japan. The main religions in Japan—Confucianism, Buddhism, and 
Shintoism—are all ones in which the rituals are more important than absolute 
rules. 

When doing business in Japan, process, manners, and how you work on 
something is more important than the final results. Whether this is good or bad 
for the economy is beyond the scope of this book. What is indisputable, though, 
is that finding flow in a “ritualistic workplace” is much easier than in one in 
which we are continually stressed out trying to achieve unclear goals set by our 
bosses. 

Rituals give us clear rules and objectives, which help us enter a state of flow. 
When we have only a big goal in front of us, we might feel lost or overwhelmed 
by it; rituals help us by giving us the process, the substeps, on the path to 
achieving a goal. When confronted with a big goal, try to break it down into parts 
and then attack each part one by one. 

Focus on enjoying your daily rituals, using them as tools to enter a state of 
flow. Don’t worry about the outcome—it will come naturally. Happiness is in the 
doing, not in the result. As a rule of thumb, remind yourself: “Rituals over goals.” 

The happiest people are not the ones who achieve the most. They are the ones 
who spend more time than others in a state of flow. 


Using flow to find your ikigai 

After reading this chapter you should have a better idea of which activities in 
your life make you enter flow. Write all of them on a piece of paper, then ask 
yourself these questions: What do the activities that drive you to flow have in 
common? Why do those activities drive you to flow? For example, are all the 
activities you most like doing ones that you practice alone or with other people? 
Do you flow more when doing things that require you to move your body or just 
to think? 

In the answers to these questions you might find the underlying ikigai that 
drives your life. If you don’t, then keep searching by going deeper into what you 
like by spending more of your time in the activities that make you flow. Also, try 
new things that are not on the list of what makes you flow but that are similar and 
that you are curious about. For example, if photography is something that drives 
you into flow, you could also try painting; you might even like it more! Or if you 
love snowboarding and have never tried surfing . . . 


Flow is mysterious. It is like a muscle: the more you train it, the more you will 
flow, and the closer you will be to your ikigai. 




MASTERS OF LONGEVITY 

Words of wisdom from the 
longest-living people in the world 



when we started working on this book, we didn’t want to just research the factors that contribute to a long and 
happy life; we wanted to hear from the true masters of this art. 

The interviews we conducted in Okinawa merit their own chapter, but in the 
section that precedes it we have provided an overview of the life philosophies of 
a few international champions of longevity. We’re talking about 
supercentenarians—people who live to 110 years of age or more. 

The term was coined in 1970 by Norris McWhirter, editor of The Guinness 
Book of World Records. Its use became more widespread in the 1990s, after it 
appeared in William Strauss and Neil Howe’s Generations. Today there are an 
estimated 300 to 450 supercentenarians in the world, although the age of only 
around 75 of them has been confirmed. They aren’t superheroes, but we could see 
them as such for having spent far more time on this planet than the average life 
expectancy would predict. 

Given the rise in life expectancy around the world, the number of 
supercentenarians might also increase. A healthy and purposeful life could help 
us join their ranks. 

Let’s take a look at what a few of them have to say. 


Misao Okawa (117) 

“Eat and sleep, and you’ll live a long time. You have to learn to 
relax.” 

According to the Gerontology Research Group, until April 2015, the oldest living 
person in the world was Misao Okawa, who passed away in a care facility in 
Osaka, Japan, after living for 117 years and 27 days. 

The daughter of a textile merchant, she was born in 1898, when Spain lost its 
colonies in Cuba and the Philippines, and the United States annexed Hawaii and 
launched Pepsi-Cola. Until she was 110, this woman—who lived in three 
different centuries—cared for herself unassisted. 

When specialists asked about her self-care routine, Misao answered simply, 
“Eating sushi and sleeping,” to which we should add, having a tremendous thirst 


for life. When they inquired about her secret for longevity, she answered with a 
smile, “I ask myself the same thing.”- 

Proof that Japan continues to be a factory of long life: In July of the same year 
Sakari Momoi passed away at 112 years and 150 days old. At the time he was the 
oldest man in the world, though he was younger than fifty-seven women. 


Maria Capovilla (116) 

“I’ve never eaten meat in my life.” 

Born in Ecuador in 1889, Maria Capovilla was recognized by Guinness as the 
world’s oldest person. She died of pneumonia in 2006, at 116 years and 347 days 
old, leaving behind three children, twelve grandchildren, and twenty great-and 
great-great-grandchildren. 

She gave one of her last interviews at age 107, sharing her memories and her 
thoughts: 


I’m happy, and I give thanks to God, who keeps me going. I never thought I'd live so long, I thought I'd 
die long ago. My husband, Antonio Capovilla, was the captain of a ship. He passed away at 84. We had 
two daughters and a son, and now I have many grandchildren and great-grandchildren. 

Things were better, back in the old days. People behaved better. We used to dance, but we were 
more restrained; there was this one song I loved dancing to: “Maria” by Luis Alarcon. I still remember 
most of the words. I also remember many prayers, and say them every day. 

I like the waltz, and can still dance it. I also still make crafts, I still do some of the things I did when 
I was in school.^ 


When she had finished recalling her past, she began to dance—one of her 
great passions—with an energy that made her seem decades younger. 

When asked about her secret for longevity, she responded simply, “I don’t 
know what the secret to long life is. The only thing I do is I’ve never eaten meat in 
my life. I attribute it to that.” 


Jeanne Calment (122) 

“Everything’s fine.” 

Born in Arles, France, in February 1875, Jeanne Calment lived until August 4, 
1997, making her, at 122, the oldest person of verified age in history. She 
jokingly said that she “competed with Methuselah,” and there is no question that 


she broke numerous records as she went on celebrating birthdays. 

She died of natural causes at the end of a happy life during which she denied 
herself almost nothing. She rode a bicycle until she turned 100. She lived on her 
own until 110, when she agreed to move into a nursing home after accidentally 
starting a small fire in her apartment. She stopped smoking at 120, when her 
cataracts started making it hard for her to bring a cigarette to her lips. 

One of her secrets may have been her sense of humor. As she said on her 
120th birthday, “I see badly, I hear badly, and I feel bad, but everything’s fine.”- 


Walter Breuning (114) 

“If you keep your mind and body busy, you’ll be around a long 
time.” 

Born in Minnesota in 1896, Walter Breuning was able to see three centuries in his 
lifetime. He died in Montana in 2011, from natural causes; he’d had two wives 
and a fifty-year career on the railroad. At eighty-three he retired to an assisted 
living center in Montana, where he remained until his death. He is the second- 
oldest man (of verified age) ever born in the United States. 

He gave many interviews in his final years, insisting that his longevity 
stemmed from, among other things, his habit of eating only two meals per day 
and working for as many years as he could. “Your mind and your body. You keep 
both busy,” he said on his 112th birthday, “you’ll be here a long time.” Back then, 
he was still exercising every day. 

Among Breuning’s other secrets: He had a habit of helping others, and he 
wasn’t afraid of dying. As he declared in a 2010 interview with the Associated 
Press, “We’re all going to die. Some people are scared of dying. Never be afraid 
to die. Because you’re born to die.”- 

Before passing away in 2011, he is said to have told a pastor that he’d made a 
deal with God: If he wasn’t going to get better, it was time to go. 


Alexander Imich (111) 

“I just haven’t died yet.” 

Bom in Poland in 1903, Alexander Imich was a chemist and parapsychologist 

rpeirlincr in thp TTnifprl fitntpe whn nftpr thn Hpnth of hie nrpHpppeenr in 901 A 


ivuiviiix^ in uiv \_y 111 iv v_/ m ivu ttiivj iu ivi mv uvuui vi mu |-»i vv»v wuuv/i 111 i-v/ x ■ «, 

became the oldest man of authenticated age in the world. Imich himself died 
shortly thereafter, in June of that year, leaving behind a long life rich with 
experiences. 

Imich attributed his longevity to, among other things, never drinking alcohol. 
“It’s not as though I’d won the Nobel Prize,” he said upon being declared the 
world’s oldest man. “I never thought I’d get to be so old.” When asked about his 
secret to living so long, his answer was “I don’t know. I just haven’t died yet.”- 


Ikigai artists 

The secret to long life, however, is not held by supercentenarians alone. There are 
many people of advanced age who, though they haven’t made it into Guinness 
World Records , offer us inspiration and ideas for bringing energy and meaning to 
our lives. 

Artists, for example, who carry the torch of their ikigai instead of retiring, 
have this power. 

Art, in all its forms, is an ikigai that can bring happiness and purpose to our 
days. Enjoying or creating beauty is free, and something all human beings have 
access to. 

Hokusai, the Japanese artist who made woodblock prints in the ukiyo-e style 
and lived for 88 years, from the mid-eighteenth to the mid-nineteenth century, 
added this postscript to the first edition of his One Hundred Views of Mount 
Fuji:- 


All that I have produced before the age of 70 is not worth being counted. It is at the age of 73 that I 
have somewhat begun to understand the structure of true nature, of animals and grasses, and trees and 
birds, and fishes and insects; consequently at 80 years of age I shall have made still more progress; at 
90 I hope to have penetrated into the mystery of things; at 100 years of age I should have reached 
decidedly a marvelous degree, and when I shall be 110, all that I do, every point and every line, shall be 
instinct with life. 


In the pages that follow, we’ve collected some of the most inspirational words 
from artists interviewed by Camille Sweeney for the New York Times .- Of those 
still living, none have retired, and all still enjoy their passion, which they plan to 
pursue until their final breath, demonstrating that when you have a clear purpose, 
no one can stop you. 



The actor Christopher Plummer, still working at eighty-six, reveals a dark 
desire shared by many who love the profession: “We want to drop dead onstage. 
That would be a nice theatrical way to go.”- 

Osamu Tezuka, the father of modern Japanese manga, shared this feeling. 
Before he died in 1989, his last words as he drew one final cartoon were “Please, 
just let me work!’- 

The eighty-six-year-old filmmaker Frederick Wiseman declared on a stroll 
through Paris that he likes to work, which is why he does it with such intensity. 
“Everybody complains about their aches and pains and all that, but my friends are 
either dead or are still working,” he said.— 

Carmen Herrera, a painter who just entered her one hundredth year, sold her 
first canvas at age eighty-nine. Today her work is in the permanent collections of 
the Tate Modem and the Museum of Modern Art. When asked how she viewed 
her future, she responded, “I am always waiting to finish the next thing. Absurd, I 
know. I go day by day.”— 


Never Stop Learning 

“You may grow old and trembling in your anatomies, you may lie awake 
at night listening to the disorder of your veins, you may miss your only 
love, you may see the world about you devastated by evil lunatics, or know 
your honour trampled in the sewers of baser minds. There is only one 
thing for it then—to leam. Learn why the world wags and what wags it. 
That is the only thing which the mind can never exhaust, never alienate, 
never be tortured by, never fear or distrust, and never dream of 
regretting.” 

—T. H. White, The Once and Future King 


For his part, naturalist and author Edward O. Wilson asserted, “I feel I have 
enough experience to join those who are addressing big questions. About ten 
years ago, when I began reading and thinking more broadly about the questions of 
what are we, where did we come from and where are we going, I was astonished 
at how little this was being done.”— 

Ellsworth Kelly, an artist who passed away in 2015 at the age of ninety-two, 
assured us that the idea that we lose our faculties with age is, in part, a myth, 



because instead we develop a greater clarity and capacity for observation. “It’s 
one thing about getting older, you see more. . . . Every day I’m continuing to see 
new things. That’s why there are new paintings.”— 

At eighty-six, the architect Frank Gehry reminds us that some buildings can 
take seven years “from the time you’re hired until you’re finished,”- - a fact that 
favors a patient attitude with regard to the passage of time. The man responsible 
for the Guggenheim Museum Bilbao, however, knows how to live in the here and 
now: “You stay in your time. You don’t go backward. I think if you relate to the 
time you’re in, you keep your eyes and ears open, read the paper, see what’s going 
on, stay curious about everything, you will automatically be in your time.”— 


Longevity in Japan 

Because of its robust civil registry, many of those verified as having lived 
the longest are found in the United States; however, there are many 
centenarians living in remote villages in other countries. A peaceful life in 
the countryside seems pretty common among people who have watched a 
century pass. 

Without question, the international superstar of longevity is Japan, 
which has the highest life expectancy of any country in the world. In 
addition to a healthy diet, which we will explore in detail, and an 
integrated health care system in which people go to the doctor for regular 
checkups to prevent disease, longevity in Japan is closely tied to its 
culture, as we will see later on. 

The sense of community, and the fact that Japanese people make an 
effort to stay active until the very end, are key elements of their secret to 
long life. 

If you want to stay busy even when there’s no need to work, there has 
to be an ikigai on your horizon, a purpose that guides you throughout your 
life and pushes you to make things of beauty and utility for the 
community and yourself. 




LESSONS FROM JAPAN’S CENTENARIANS 

Traditions and proverbs for 
happiness and longevity 



TOGETToOgimi, we had to fly nearly three hours from Tokyo to Naha, the capital of Okinawa. Several months 
earlier we had contacted the town council of a place known as the Village of Longevity to explain the 
purpose of our trip and our intention to interview the oldest members of the community. After numerous 
conversations, we finally got the help we were looking for and were able to rent a house just outside the 
town. 

One year after starting this project, we found ourselves on the doorstep of 
some of the longest-living people in the world. 

We realized right away that time seems to have stopped there, as though the 
entire town were living in an endless here and now. 


Arriving in Ogimi 

After two hours on the road from Naha, we’re finally able to stop worrying about 
the traffic. To our left are the sea and an empty stretch of beach; to our right, the 
mountainous jungle of Okinawa’s Yanbaru forests. 

Once Route 58 passes Nago, where Orion beer—the pride of Okinawa—is 
made, it skirts the coast until it reaches Ogimi. Every now and then a few little 
houses and stores crop up in the narrow stretch of land between the road and the 
base of the mountain. 

We pass small clusters of houses scattered here and there as we enter the 
municipality of Ogimi, but the town doesn’t really seem to have a center. Our 
GPS finally guides us to our destination: the Center for the Support and 
Promotion of Well-Being, housed in an unattractive cinderblock building right 
off the highway. 

We go in through the back door, where a man named Taira is waiting for us. 
Beside him is a petite, cheerful woman who introduces herself as Yuki. Two 
other women immediately get up from desks and show us to a conference room. 
They serve us each a cup of green tea and a few shikuwasa, a small citrus fruit 
that packs a big nutritional punch, as we will see later on. 

Taira sits down across from us in his formal suit and opens up a large planner 
and a three-ring binder. Yuki sits next to him. The binder contains a list of all the 
town’s residents, organized by age and “club,” or moai. Taira points out that these 
groups of people who help one another are characteristic of Ogimi. The moai are 


not organized around any concrete objective; they function more like a family. 
Taira also tells us that volunteer work, rather than money, drives much of what 
happens in Ogimi. Everyone offers to pitch in, and the local government takes 
care of assigning tasks. This way, everyone can be useful and feels like a part of 
the community. 

Ogimi is the penultimate town before Cape Hedo, the northernmost point of 
the largest island in the archipelago. 

From the top of one of Ogimi’s mountains, we’re able to look down over the 
whole town. Almost everything is the green of the Yanbaru jungle, making us 
wonder where the nearly thirty-two hundred residents are hiding. We can see a 
few houses, but they’re scattered in little clusters near the sea or in small valleys 
accessible by side roads. 


Communal life 

We’re invited to eat in one of Ogimi’s few restaurants, but when we arrive the 
only three tables are already reserved. 

“Don’t worry, we’ll go to Churaumi instead. It never fills up,” says Yuki, 
walking back to her car. 

She’s still driving at age eighty-eight, and takes great pride in that. Her copilot 
is ninety-nine, and has also decided to spend the day with us. We have to drive 
fast to keep up with them on a highway that is sometimes more dirt than asphalt. 
Finally reaching the other end of the jungle, we can at last sit down to eat. 

“I don’t really go to restaurants,” Yuki says as we take our seats. “Almost 
everything I eat comes from my vegetable garden, and I buy my fish from 
Tanaka, who’s been my friend forever.” 

The restaurant is right by the sea and seems like something from the planet 
Tatooine, from Star Wars. The menu boasts in large letters that it serves “slow 
food” prepared with organic vegetables grown in the town. 

“But really,” Yuki continues, “food is the least important thing.” She is 
extroverted, and rather pretty. She likes to talk about her role as the director of 
several associations run by the local government. 

“Food won’t help you live longer,” she says, bringing to her lips a bite of the 
diminutive confection that followed our meal. “The secret is smiling and having a 
good time.” 

There are no bars and only a few restaurants in Ogimi, but those who live 

oro nmmr o rir*li or\r*i o 1 lifa tVi at ro\ ml atac omnnrl r*AmmnniH7 ppnfprc T U A fAU/tl 1C 


HJLV^l V^JLJLJ WJ Cl 1 JLV^JLl OWV^ACll 1111/ 111 Cl l V U1 V C'O CU.VSU11V* VsVXLXU.llUlll.ljr V^V^llll^l O. X 11IU VV11 Id 

divided into seventeen neighborhoods, and each one has a president and several 
people in charge of things like culture, festivals, social activities, and longevity. 
Residents pay close attention to this last category. 

We’re invited to the community center of one of the seventeen neighborhoods. 
It is an old building right next to one of the mountains of the Yanbaru jungle, 
home to bunagaya, the town’s iconic sprites. 


The Bunagaya Spirits of the Yanbaru Jungle 

Bunagaya are magical creatures that inhabit the Yanbaru jungle near 
Ogimi and its surrounding towns. They manifest as children with long red 
hair, and like to hide in the jungle’s gajumaru (banyan) trees and go 
fishing on the beach. 

Many of Okinawa’s stories and fables are about bunagaya sprites. They 
are mischievous, playful, and unpredictable. Locals say that the bunagaya 
love the mountains, rivers, sea, trees, earth, wind, and animals, and that if 
you want to befriend them, you have to show respect for nature. 


A birthday party 

When we arrive at the neighborhood’s community center, we’re greeted by a 
group of about twenty people who proudly proclaim, “The youngest among us is 
eighty-three!” 

We conduct our interviews at a large table while drinking green tea. When we 
finish, we’re brought to an event space, where we celebrate the birthdays of three 
members of the group. One woman is turning ninety-nine, another ninety-four, 
and one “young man” has just reached eighty-nine. 

We sing a few songs popular in the village and finish up with “Happy 
Birthday” in English. The woman turning ninety-nine blows out the candles and 
thanks everyone for coming to her party. We eat homemade shikuwasa cake and 
end up dancing and celebrating as though it were the birthday of a 
twentysomething. 

It’s the first party, but not the last, that we’ll attend during our week in the 
village. We’ll also do karaoke with a group of seniors who sing better than we do, 
and attend a traditional festival with local bands, dancers, and food stands at the 





foot of a mountain. 


Celebrate each day, together 

Celebrations seem to be an essential part of life in Ogimi. 

We’re invited to watch a game of gateball, one of the most popular sports 
among Okinawa’s older residents. It involves hitting a ball with a mallet-like stick. 
It is a low-impact sport that can be played anywhere, and is a good excuse to 
move around and have fun as a group. The residents hold local competitions, and 
there is no age limit for participants. 

We participate in the weekly game and lose to a woman who recently turned 
104. Everyone cheers, and the defeated look on our faces elicits laughter. 

In addition to playing and celebrating as a community, spirituality is also 
essential to the happiness of the village’s residents. 


The gods of Okinawa 

The main religion in Okinawa is known as Ryukyu Shinto. Ryukyu is the original 
name of the Okinawa archipelago, and Shinto means “the path of the gods.”- 
Ryukyu Shinto combines elements of Chinese Taoism, Confucianism, Buddhism, 
and Shintoism with shamanistic and animistic elements. 

According to this ancient faith, the world is populated by an infinite number 
of spirits divided into several types: spirits of the home, of the forest, of the trees, 
and of the mountains. It is important to appease these spirits through rituals and 
festivals, and by consecrating sacred grounds. 

Okinawa is full of sacred jungles and forests, where many of the two main 
kinds of temples are found: the utaki and the uganju. We visited an uganju, or 
small, open-air temple adorned with incense and coins, next to a waterfall in 
Ogimi. The utaki is a collection of stones where people go to pray and where, 
supposedly, spirits gather. 

In Okinawa’s religious practice, women are considered spiritually superior to 
men, whereas the opposite is true of traditional Shintoism in the rest of Japan. 
Yuta are women chosen as mediums by their communities to make contact with 
the spirit realm through traditional rites. 


Ancestor worship is another important feature of spiritual practice in 
Okinawa, and in Japan in general. The home of each generation’s firstborn 
usually contains a butsudan, or small altar, used to pray for and make offerings to 
the family’s ancestors. 


Mabui 

Every person has an essence, or mabui. This mabui is our spirit and the 
source of our life force. It is immortal and makes us who we are. 

Sometimes, the mabui of someone who has died is trapped in the body 
of a living person. This situation requires a separation ritual to free the 
mabui of the deceased; it often happens when a person dies suddenly— 
especially at a young age—and his or her mabui does not want to move on 
to the realm of the dead. 

A mabui can also be passed from person to person by physical contact. 
A grandmother who leaves her granddaughter a ring transfers a part of her 
mabui to her. Photographs can also be a medium for passing mabui among 
people. 


The older, the stronger 

Looking back, our days in Ogimi were intense but relaxed—sort of like the 
lifestyle of the locals, who always seemed to be busy with important tasks but 
who, upon closer inspection, did everything with a sense of calm. They were 
always pursuing their ikigai, but they were never in a rush. 

Not only did they seem to be happily busy, but we also noticed that they 
followed the other principles for happiness that Washington Burnap stated two 
hundred years ago: “The grand essentials to happiness in this life are something to 
do, something to love, and something to hope for.”- 

On our last day, we went to buy gifts at a small market at the edge of town. 
The only things sold there are local vegetables, green tea, and shikuwasa juice, 
along with bottles of water from a spring hidden in the Yanbaru forests, bearing 
labels that read “Longevity Water.” 

We bought ourselves some of this Longevity Water and drank it in the parking 
lot, looking out over the sea and hoping that the little bottles that promised a 



magic elixir would bring us health and long life, and would help us find our own 
ikigai. Then we took a photo with a statue of a bunagaya, and walked up to it one 
last time to read the inscription: 


A Declaration from the Town Where People Live Longest 

At 80 I am still a child. 

When I come to see you at 90, 
send me away to wait until I’m 100. 

The older, the stronger; 

let us not depend too much on our children as we age. 

If you seek long life and health, you are welcome in our village, 

where you will be blessed by nature, 

and together we will discover the secret to longevity. 

April 23, 1993 
Ogimi Federation of Senior Citizen Clubs 


The interviews 

Over the course of a week we conducted a total of one hundred interviews, asking 
the eldest members of the community about their life philosophy, their ikigai, and 
the secrets to longevity. We filmed these conversations with two cameras for use 
in a little documentary, and chose a few especially meaningful and inspiring 
statements to include in this section of the book. 

1. Don’t worry 

“The secret to a long life is not to worry. And to keep your heart young—don’t let it grow old. Open 
your heart to people with a nice smile on your face. If you smile and open your heart, your 
grandchildren and everyone else will want to see you.” 

“The best way to avoid anxiety is to go out in the street and say hello to people. I do it every day. I go 
out there and say, ‘Hello!’ and ‘See you later!’ Then I go home and care for my vegetable garden. In the 
afternoon, I spend time with friends.” 

“Here, everyone gets along. We try not to cause problems. Spending time together and having fun is 
the only thing that matters.” 



2. Cultivate good habits 

“I feel joy every morning waking up at six and opening the curtains to look out at my garden, where I 
grow my own vegetables. I go right outside to check on my tomatoes, my mandarin oranges ... I love 
the sight of them—it relaxes me. After an hour in the garden I go back inside and make breakfast.” 

“I plant my own vegetables and cook them myself. That’s my ikigai .” 

“The key to staying sharp in old age is in your fingers. From your fingers to your brain, and back again. 
If you keep your fingers busy, you'll live to see one hundred.” 

“I get up at four every day. I set my alarm for that time, have a cup of coffee, and do a little exercise, 
lifting my arms. That gives me energy for the rest of the day.” 

“I eat a bit of everything; I think that’s the secret. I like variety in what I eat; I think it tastes better.” 
“Working. If you don’t work, your body breaks down.” 

“When I wake up, I go to the butsudan and light incense. You have to keep your ancestors in mind. It’s 
the first thing I do every morning.” 

“I wake up every day at the same time, early, and spend the morning in my vegetable garden. I go 
dancing with my friends once a week.” 

“I do exercise every day, and every morning I go for a little walk.” 

“I never forget to do my taiso exercises when I get up.” 

“Eating vegetables—it helps you live longer.” 

“To live a long time you need to do three things: exercise to stay healthy, eat well, and spend time with 
people.” 

3. Nurture your friendships every day 

“Getting together with my friends is my most important ikigai. We all get together here and talk—it’s 
very important. I always know I'll see them all here tomorrow, and that’s one of my favorite things in 
life.” 

“My main hobby is getting together with friends and neighbors.” 

“Talking each day with the people you love, that’s the secret to a long life.” 

“I say, ‘Hello!’ and ‘See you later!’ to the children on their way to school, and wave at everyone who 
goes by me in their car. ‘Drive safely!’ I say. Between 7:20 a.m. and 8:15 a.m., I’m outside on my feet 
the whole time, saying hello to people. Once everyone’s gone, I go back inside.” 



'Chatting and drinking tea with my neighbors. That’s the best thing in life. And singing together. 


“I wake up at five every morning, leave the house, and walk to the sea. Then I go to a friend’s house 
and we have tea together. That’s the secret to long life: getting together with people, and going from 
place to place.” 


4. Live an unhurried life 

“My secret to a long life is always saying to myself, ‘Slow down,’ and ‘Relax.’ You live much longer if 
you’re not in a hurry.” 

“I make things with wicker. That’s my ikigai. The first thing I do when I wake up is pray. Then I do my 
exercises and eat breakfast. At seven I calmly start working on my wicker. When I get tired at five, I 
go visit my friends.” 

“Doing many different things every day. Always staying busy, but doing one thing at a time, without 
getting overwhelmed.” 

“The secret to long life is going to bed early, waking up early, and going for a walk. Living peacefully 
and enjoying the little things. Getting along with your friends. Spring, summer, fall, winter . . . 
enjoying each season, happily.” 

5. Be optimistic 

“Every day I say to myself, ‘Today will be full of health and energy. Live it to the fullest.’” 

“I’m ninety-eight, but consider myself young. I still have so much to do.” 

“Laugh. Laughter is the most important thing. I laugh wherever I go.” 

“I’m going to live to be a hundred. Of course I am! It’s a huge motivation for me.” 

“Dancing and singing with your grandchildren is the best thing in life.” 

“I feel very fortunate to have been born here. I give thanks for it every day.” 

“The most important thing in Ogirni, in life, is to keep smiling.” 

“I do volunteer work to give back to the village a bit of what it has given to me. For example, I use my 
car to help friends get to the hospital.” 

“There’s no secret to it. The trick is just to live.” 


Keys to the Ogimi Lifestyle 




■ One hundred percent of the people we interviewed keep a vegetable 
garden, and most of them also have fields of tea, mangoes, shikuwasa, 
and so on. 

■ All belong to some form of neighborhood association, where they feel 
cared for as though by family. 

■ They celebrate all the time, even little things. Music, song, and dance 
are essential parts of daily life. 

■ They have an important purpose in life, or several. They have an ikigai, 
but they don’t take it too seriously. They are relaxed and enjoy all that 
they do. 

■ They are very proud of their traditions and local culture. 

■ They are passionate about everything they do, however insignificant it 
might seem. 

■ Locals have a strong sense of yuimaaru —recognizing the connection 
between people. They help each other with everything from work in the 
fields (harvesting sugarcane or planting rice) to building houses and 
municipal projects. Our friend Miyagi, who ate dinner with us on our 
last night in town, told us that he was building a new home with the help 
of all his friends, and that we could stay there the next time we were in 
Ogimi. 

■ They are always busy, but they occupy themselves with tasks that allow 
them to relax. We didn’t see a single old grandpa sitting on a bench 
doing nothing. They’re always coming and going—to sing karaoke, visit 
with neighbors, or play a game of gateball. 





THE IKIGAI DIET 

What the world’s longest-living 
people eat and drink 



according to the World Health Organization, Japan has the highest life expectancy in the world: 85 years for 
men and 87.3 years for women. Moreover, it has the highest ratio of centenarians in the world: more than 
520 for every million people (as of September 2016). 


LIFE EXPECTANCY IN THE COUNTRIES 
WHERE PEOPLE LIVE THE LONGEST, 
COMPARED TO THE UNITED STATES 


Life 

expectancy 

(L.E.) 


O Okinawa 
O Japan 
O Sweden 
© USA 


© 



1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 


Source: World Health Organization, 1966; Japanese Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare, 2004; U.S. 

Department of Health and Human Services/CDC, 2005 

The above graphic, which compares life expectancy in Japan, its province 
Okinawa, Sweden, and the United States, shows that, while life expectancy in 
Japan is high overall, Okinawa exceeds the national average. 

Okinawa is one of the areas in Japan that were most affected by World War II. 
As a result not only of conflicts on the battlefield but also of hunger and a lack of 
resources once the war ended, the average life expectancy was not very high 
during the 1940s and 1950s. As Okinawans recovered from the destruction, 
however, they came to be some of the country’s longest-living citizens. 

What QPprpfQ tn Inna lifp Hn thp Tnnnnpcp hrdrl? What i« it ahrmt Okinawa that 



T T 11UI ID AV LI (_/ V7 V_» l \_/l\AllU»* W L ft A LI L 


T T AAUL L7WA VLL&gt; LV AV/AA^ AAA V V*V/ LAAV «A LI|DH11VDV XAVAV* • 

makes it the best of the best in terms of life expectancy? 

Experts point out that, for one thing, Okinawa is the only province in Japan 
without trains. Its residents have to walk or cycle when not driving. It is also the 
only province that has managed to follow the Japanese government’s 
recommendation of eating less than ten grams of salt per day. 


Okinawa’s miracle diet 

The mortality rate from cardiovascular disease in Okinawa is the lowest in Japan, 
and diet almost certainly has a lot to do with this. It is no coincidence that the 
“Okinawa Diet” is so often discussed around the world at panels on nutrition. 

The most concrete and widely cited data on diet in Okinawa come from 
studies by Makoto Suzuki, a cardiologist at the University of the Ryukyus, who 
has published more than seven hundred scientific articles on nutrition and aging 
in Okinawa since 1970. 

Bradley J. Willcox and D. Craig Willcox joined Makoto Suzuki’s research 
team and published a book considered the bible on the subject, The Okinawa 
Program.- They reached the following conclusions: 

■ Locals eat a wide variety of foods, especially vegetables. Variety seems to be 
key. A study of Okinawa’s centenarians showed that they ate 206 different 
foods, including spices, on a regular basis. They ate an average of eighteen 
different foods each day, a striking contrast to the nutritional poverty of our 
fast-food culture. 

■ They eat at least five servings of fruits and vegetables every day. At least 
seven types of fruits and vegetables are consumed by Okinawans on a daily 
basis. The easiest way to check if there is enough variety on your table is to 
make sure you’re “eating the rainbow.” A table featuring red peppers, 
carrots, spinach, cauliflower, and eggplant, for example, offers great color 
and variety. Vegetables, potatoes, legumes, and soy products such as tofu are 
the staples of an Okinawan’s diet. More than 30 percent of their daily 
calories comes from vegetables. 

■ Grains are the foundation of their diet. Japanese people eat white rice every 
day, sometimes adding noodles. Rice is the primary food in Okinawa, as 
well. 


■ They rarely eat sugar, and if they do, it’s cane sugar. We drove through 
several sugarcane fields every morning on our way to Ogimi, and even drank 
a glass of cane juice at Nakijin Castle. Beside the stall selling the juice was a 
sign describing the anticarcinogenic benefits of sugarcane. 

In addition to these basic dietary principles, Okinawans eat fish an average of 
three times per week; unlike in other parts of Japan, the most frequently 
consumed meat is pork, though locals eat it only once or twice per week. 

Along these lines, Makoto Suzuki’s studies indicate the following: 

■ Okinawans consume, in general, one-third as much sugar as the rest of 
Japan’s population, which means that sweets and chocolate are much less a 
part of their diet. 

■ They also eat practically half as much salt as the rest of Japan: 7 grams per 
day, compared to an average of 12. 

■ They consume fewer calories: an average of 1,785 per day, compared to 
2,068 in the rest of Japan. In fact, low caloric intake is common among the 
five Blue Zones. 


Hara hachi bu 

This brings us back to the 80 percent rule we mentioned in the first chapter, a 
concept known in Japanese as hara hachi bu. It’s easy to do: When you notice 
you’re almost full but could have a little more ... just stop eating! 

One easy way to start applying the concept of hara hachi bu is to skip dessert. 
Or to reduce portion size. The idea is to still be a little bit hungry when you finish. 

This is why portion size tends to be much smaller in Japan than in the West. 
Food isn’t served as appetizers, main courses, and dessert. Instead, it’s much more 
common to see everything presented at once on small plates: one with rice, 
another with vegetables, a bowl of miso soup, and something to snack on. Serving 
food on many small plates makes it easier to avoid eating too much, and 
facilitates the varied diet discussed at the beginning of this chapter. 

Hara hachi bu is an ancient practice. The twelfth-century book on Zen 
Buddhism Zazen Youjinki recommends eating two-thirds as much as you might 
want to. Eating less than one might want is common among all Buddhist temples 


in the East. Perhaps Buddhism recognized the benefits of limiting caloric intake 
more than nine centuries ago. 


So, eat less to live longer? 

Few would challenge this idea. Without taking it to the extreme of malnutrition, 
of course, eating fewer calories than our bodies ask for seems to increase 
longevity. The key to staying healthy while consuming fewer calories is eating 
foods with a high nutritional value (especially “superfoods”) and avoiding those 
that add to our overall caloric intake but offer little to no nutritional value. 

The calorie restriction we’ve been discussing is one of the most effective ways 
to add years to your life. If the body regularly consumes enough, or too many, 
calories, it gets lethargic and starts to wear down, expending significant energy on 
digestion alone. 

Another benefit of calorie restriction is that it reduces levels of IGF-1 
(insulin-like growth factor 1) in the body. IGF-1 is a protein that plays a 
significant role in the aging process; it seems that one of the reasons humans and 
animals age is an excess of this protein in their blood.- 

Whether calorie restriction will extend lifespan in humans is not yet known, 
but data increasingly indicate that moderate calorie restriction with adequate 
nutrition has a powerful protective effect against obesity, type 2 diabetes, 
inflammation, hypertension, and cardiovascular disease and reduces metabolic 
risk factors associated with cancer.- 

An alternative to following the 80 percent rule on a daily basis is to fast for 
one or two days each week. The 5:2 (or fasting) diet recommends two days of 
fasting (consuming fewer than five hundred calories) every week and eating 
normally on the other five days. 

Among its many benefits, fasting helps cleanse the digestive system and allows 
it to rest. 


15 natural antioxidants found in the Okinawan diet 

Antioxidants are molecules that slow the oxidation process in cells, neutralizing 
the free radicals that cause damage and accelerate aging. The antioxidant power 
of green tea, for example, is well known, and will be discussed later at greater 


ICIiglll. 

Because they are rich in antioxidants and are eaten nearly every day in the 
region, these fifteen foods are considered keys to Okinawan vitality: 

■ Tofu 

■ Miso 

■ Tuna 

■ Carrots 

■ Goya (bitter melon) 

■ Kombu (sea kelp) 

■ Cabbage 

■ Nori (seaweed) 

■ Onion 

■ Soy sprouts 

■ Hechima (cucumber-like gourd) 

■ Soybeans (boiled or raw) 

■ Sweet potato 

■ Peppers 

■ Sanpin-cha (jasmine tea) 


Sanpin-cha: The reigning infusion in Okinawa 

Okinawans drink more Sanpin-cha—a mix of green tea and jasmine flowers— 
than any other kind of tea. The closest approximation in the West would be the 
jasmine tea that usually comes from China. A 1988 study conducted by Hiroko 
Sho at the Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology indicates that jasmine 
tea reduces blood cholesterol levels.- 

Sanpin-cha can be found in many different forms in Okinawa, and is even 
available in vending machines. In addition to all the antioxidant benefits of green 
tea, it boasts the benefits of jasmine, which include: 

■ Reducing the risk of heart attack 

■ Strengthening the immune system 

■ Helping relieve stress 

■ Lowering cholesterol 


nr; nou/om’ Hrinlv on QA7ArortA r\f t\-\ 1*AA nunc r\f Q nrmin nK a a\ rAt-x t 





wxvxixcivvcino xxx xixiv cm ci v v^x cig,v^ v/x nixv^upo ux vjcixxpxxx _ \^xxci v^v^x y vxci y. 

It might be hard to find exactly the same blend in the West, but we can drink 
jasmine tea, or even a high-quality green tea, instead. 


The secrets of green tea 

Green tea has been credited for centuries with significant medicinal properties. 
Recent studies have confirmed its many benefits, and have attested to the 
importance of this ancient plant in the longevity of those who drink it often. 

Originally from China, where it has been consumed for millennia, green tea 
didn’t make its way to the rest of the world until just a few centuries ago. Unlike 
other teas, and as a result of being air-dried without fermentation, it retains its 
active elements even after being dried and crumbled. It offers meaningful health 
benefits such as: 

■ Controlling cholesterol 

■ Lowering blood sugar levels 

■ Improving circulation 

■ Protection against the flu (vitamin C) 

■ Promoting bone health (fluoride) 

■ Protection against certain bacterial infections 

■ Protection against UV damage 

■ Cleansing and diuretic effects 

White tea, with its high concentration of polyphenols, may be even more 
effective against aging. In fact, it is considered to be the natural product with the 
greatest antioxidant power in the world—to the extent that one cup of white tea 
might pack the same punch as about a dozen glasses of orange juice. 

In summary: Drinking green or white tea every day can help us reduce the free 
radicals in our bodies, keeping us young longer. 


The powerful shikuwasa 

Shikuwasa is the citrus fruit par excellence of Okinawa, and Ogimi is its largest 
producer in all of Japan. 


The fruit is extremely acidic: It is impossible to drink shikuwasa juice without 
diluting it first with water. Its taste is somewhere between that of a lime and a 
mandarin orange, to which it bears a family resemblance. 

Shikuwasas also contain high levels of nobiletin, a flavonoid rich in 
antioxidants. 

All citrus fruits—grapefruits, oranges, lemons—are high in nobiletin, but 
Okinawa’s shikuwasas have forty times as much as oranges. Consuming nobiletin 
has been proven to protect us from arteriosclerosis, cancer, type 2 diabetes, and 
obesity in general. 

Shikuwasas also contain vitamins C and Bj, beta carotene, and minerals. They 

are used in many traditional dishes and to add flavor to food, and are squeezed to 
make juice. While conducting research at the birthday parties of the town’s 
“grandparents,” we were served shikuwasa cake. 


The Antioxidant Canon, for Westerners 

In 2010 the UK’s Daily Mirror published a list of foods recommended by 

experts to combat aging. Among these foods readily available in the West 

are: 

■ Vegetables such as broccoli and chard, for their high concentration of 
water, minerals, and fiber 

■ Oily fish such as salmon, mackerel, tuna, and sardines, for all the 
antioxidants in their fat 

■ Fruits such as citrus, strawberries, and apricots; they are an excellent 
source of vitamins and help eliminate toxins from the body 

■ Berries such as blueberries and goji berries; they are rich in 
phytochemical antioxidants 

■ Dried fruits, which contain vitamins and antioxidants, and give you 
energy 

■ Grains such as oats and wheat, which give you energy and contain 
minerals 

■ Olive oil, for its antioxidant effects that show in your skin 

■ Red wine, in moderation, for its antioxidant and vasodilatory properties 

Foods that should be eliminated are refined sugar and grains, processed 

baked goods, and prepared foods, along with cow’s milk and all its 

a :— 4-i T7~ii : a: u , r i __j _ 




uerivauves. ronowmg mis uiei win neip you reel younger ana siow me 

process of premature aging. 



VIII 


GENTLE MOVEMENTS, LONGER LIFE 

Exercises from the East that 
promote health and longevity 



studies from the Blue Zones suggest that the people who live longest are not the ones who do the most exercise 
but rather the ones who move the most. 

When we visited Ogimi, the Village of Longevity, we discovered that even 
people over eighty and ninety years old are still highly active. They don’t stay at 
home looking out the window or reading the newspaper. Ogimi’s residents walk a 
lot, do karaoke with their neighbors, get up early in the morning, and, as soon as 
they’ve had breakfast—or even before—head outside to weed their gardens. They 
don’t go to the gym or exercise intensely, but they almost never stop moving in 
the course of their daily routines. 


As Easy as Getting out of Your Chair 

“Metabolism slows down 90 percent after 30 minutes of sitting. The 
enzymes that move the bad fat from your arteries to your muscles, where 
it can get burned off, slow down. And after two hours, good cholesterol 
drops 20 percent. Just getting up for five minutes is going to get things 
going again. These things are so simple they’re almost stupid,” says Gavin 
Bradley 1 - in a 2015 interview with Brigid Schulte for the Washington Post.- 
Bradley is one of the preeminent experts on the subject, and the director 
of an international organization dedicated to building awareness of how 
detrimental sitting all the time can be to our health. 


If we live in a city, we might find it hard to move in natural and healthy ways 
every day, but we can turn to exercises that have proven for centuries to be good 
for the body. 

The Eastern disciplines for bringing body, mind, and soul into balance have 
become quite popular in the West, but in their countries of origin they have been 
used for ages to promote health. 

Yoga—originally from India, though very popular in Japan—and China’s 
qigong and tai chi, among other disciplines, seek to create harmony between a 
person’s body and mind so they can face the world with strength, joy, and 
serenity. 



nicy cue LUUICU Uf&gt; CilAlif) ui yuum, CU1U 5&gt;C1C11CC ll£lJ&gt; CllLlUi5&gt;CU LUC C1CU111. 

These gentle exercises offer extraordinary health benefits, and are particularly 
appropriate for older individuals who have a harder time staying fit. 

Tai chi has been shown, among other things, to slow the development of 
osteoporosis and Parkinson’s disease, to increase circulation, and to improve 
muscle tone and flexibility. Its emotional benefits are just as important: It is a 
great shield against stress and depression. 

You don’t need to go to the gym for an hour every day or run marathons. As 
Japanese centenarians show us, all you need is to add movement to your day. 
Practicing any of these Eastern disciplines on a regular basis is a great way to do 
so. An added benefit is that they all have well-defined steps, and as we saw in 
chapter IV, disciplines with clear rules are good for flow. If you don’t like any of 
these disciplines, feel free to choose a practice that you love and that makes you 
move. 

In the following pages we’ll take a look at some of the practices that promote 
health and longevity—but first, a little appetizer: a singularly Japanese exercise 
for starting your day. 


Radio taiso 

This morning warm-up has been around since before World War II. The “radio” 
part of its name is from when the instructions for each exercise were transmitted 
over the radio, but today people usually do these movements while tuned to a 
television channel or Internet video demonstrating the steps. 

One of the main purposes of doing radio taiso is to promote a spirit of unity 
among participants. The exercises are always done in groups, usually in schools 
before the start of classes, and in businesses before the workday begins. 

Statistics show that 30 percent of Japanese practice radio taiso for a few 
minutes every morning, but radio taiso is one thing that almost everyone we 
interviewed in Ogimi had in common. Even the residents of the nursing home we 
visited dedicated at least five minutes every day to it, though some did the 
exercises from their wheelchairs. We joined them on their daily practice and we 
felt refreshed for the rest of the day. 

When these exercises are done in a group, it is usually on a sports field or in a 
large reception hall, and typically involves some kind of loudspeaker. 

The exercises take five or ten minutes, depending on whether you do all or 
only some of them. They focus on dynamic stretching and increasing joint 


mobility. One of the most iconic radio taiso exercises consists of simply raising 
your arms above your head and then bringing them down in a circular motion. It 
is a tool to wake up the body, an easy mobility workout that is low in intensity 
and that focuses on exercising as many joints as possible. 

It might seem basic, but in our modern lives, we can spend days without 
raising our arms above our ears. Think about it: our arms are down when using 
computers, when using smartphones, when reading books. One of the few times 
we raise our hands over our heads is when reaching for something in a cupboard 
or closet, while our ancestors were raising their hands over their heads all the 
time when gathering things from trees. Radio taiso helps us to practice all the 
basic movements of the body. 



Basic version of the radio taiso exercises (5 minutes). 







Yoga 

Popular in Japan as well as in the West, yoga can be done by almost anyone. 

Some of its poses have even been adapted for pregnant women and practitioners 
with physical disabilities. 

Yoga comes from India, where it was developed millennia ago to unite our 
mental and physical elements. The word yoga itself comes from the Sanskrit term 
for “yoke,” which refers to the crosspiece that binds draft animals to one another 
and to the cart they’re pulling. Yoga strives to unite body and mind in the same 
way, guiding us toward a healthy lifestyle in harmony with the world around us. 
The main objectives of yoga are: 

■ To bring us closer to our (human) nature 

■ Mental and physical purification 

■ To bring us closer to the divine 

Styles of yoga 

Though all are oriented toward similar goals, there are many different types of 
yoga that vary according to the traditions and texts from which they were 
developed. The differences among them lie, as the masters say, in the path taken 
to the summit of our best self. 

■ Jnana yoga : the yoga of wisdom; the search for discipline and mental 
growth 

■ Karma yoga : focuses on action, on tasks and duties that benefit oneself and 
one’s community 

■ Bhakti yoga : the yoga of devotion and surrender to the divine 

■ Mantra yoga : focuses on the recitation of mantras to reach a state of 
relaxation 

■ Kundalini yoga : combines diverse steps to reach the desired mental state 

■ Raja yoga: also known as the royal path; encompasses a range of steps 
geared toward achieving communion with oneself and others 

■ Hatha yoga: the most widespread form in the West and Japan; characterized 
by asanas or poses combined in a quest for balance 


How to do a Sun Salutation 


The Sun Salutation is one of the most iconic exercises in hatha yoga. To do it, you 

simply have to follow these twelve basic movements: 

1. With your feet together, stand up straight but keep your muscles relaxed. 
Exhale. 

2. Place the palms of your hands together in front of your chest; from this 
position, inhale as you raise your arms above your head and bend backward 
slightly. 

3. Exhale as you bend forward until you touch the ground with the palms of 
your hands, without bending your knees. 

4. Stretch one leg back to touch the floor with the tips of your toes. Inhale. 

5. Bring the other leg back, keeping your legs and arms straight, as you hold 
your breath. 

6. As you exhale, bend your arms and bring your chest to the ground and then 
forward, resting your knees on the ground. 

7. Straighten your arms and bend your spine back, keeping the lower half of 
your body on the ground. Inhale. 

8. With your hands and feet on the ground, lift your hips until your arms and 
legs are straight and your body forms an upside-down V. Exhale throughout 
the movement. 

9. Bring forward the same leg you’d stretched back earlier and bend it so that 
your knee and foot are aligned under your head and between your hands. 
Inhale. 

10. Exhale as you bring your back foot forward and straighten your legs, keeping 
your hands on the ground as in posture 3. 

11. Bring your arms above your head with your palms together and bend 
backward slightly, as you did in posture 2, while you inhale. 

12. Lower your arms to their initial position in mountain pose while you exhale. 

You’ve just greeted the sun; now you’re ready to have a fantastic day. 








Exhale 


Inhale 



Tai chi 

Also known as t’ai chi ch’uan (or taijiquan), tai chi is a Chinese martial art that 
can be traced back hundreds of years to Buddhism and Confucianism; it is very 
popular in Japan, too. 

According to Chinese tradition, it was created by the Taoist master and martial 
arts practitioner Zhang Sanfeng, though it was Yang Luchan who in the 
nineteenth century brought the form to the rest of the world. 





Tai chi was originally a neijia, or internal martial art, meaning its goal was 
personal growth. Focused on self-defense, it teaches those who practice it to 
defeat their adversaries by using the least amount of force possible and by relying 
on agility. 

Tai chi, which was also seen as a means of healing body and mind, would go 
on to be used more frequently to foster health and inner peace. To encourage its 
citizens to be more active, the Chinese government promoted it as an exercise, 
and it lost its original connection to martial arts, becoming instead a source of 
health and well-being accessible to all. 

Styles of tai chi 

There are different schools and styles of tai chi. The following are the best 
known: 

■ Chen-style : alternates between slow movements and explosive ones 

■ Yang-style : the most widespread of the forms; characterized by slow, fluid 
movements 

■ Wu-style : utilizes small, slow, deliberate movements 

■ Hao-style : centered on internal movements, with almost microscopic 
external movements; one of the least practiced forms of tai chi, even in 
China 

Despite their differences, these styles all have the same objectives: 

1. To control movement through stillness 

2. To overcome force through finesse 

3. To move second and arrive first 

4. To know yourself and your opponent 

The ten basic principles of tai chi 

According to the master Yang Chengfu, the correct practice of tai chi follows ten 
basic principles: 


1. Elevate the crown of your head, and focus all your energy there. 

2. Tighten your chest and expand your back to lighten your lower body. 



3. Relax your waist and let it guide your body. 

4. Learn to differentiate between heaviness and lightness, knowing how your 
weight is distributed. 

5. Relax the shoulders to allow free movement of the arms and promote the 
flow of energy. 

6. Value the agility of the mind over the strength of the body. 

7. Unify the upper and lower body so they act in concert. 

8. Unify the internal and the external to synchronize mind, body, and breath. 

9. Do not break the flow of your movement; maintain fluidity and harmony. 

10. Look for stillness in movement. An active body leads to a calm mind. 

Imitating clouds 

One of the best-known movements in tai chi consists of following the form of 
clouds in an exercise called Wave Hands Like Clouds. Here are the steps: 

1. Extend your arms in front of you with your palms down. 

2. Turn your palms to face in, as though you were hugging a tree trunk. 

3. Open your arms out to the side. 

4. Bring the left arm up and center, and the right arm down and center. 

5. Trace the shape of a ball in front of your body. 

6. Turn your left palm toward your face. 

7. Shift your weight to your left foot and pivot from your hip toward that side, 
while your eyes follow the movement of your hand. 

8. Bring your left hand to your waist and your right hand in front of your face. 

9. Shift your weight to your right foot. 

10. Pivot toward your right, looking at your raised right hand the entire time. 

11. Repeat this movement fluidly, shifting your weight from one foot to the 
other as you reposition your hands. 

12. Stretch your arms out in front of you again and bring them down slowly, 
returning to your initial position. 




Qigong 

Also known as chi kung, its name combines qi (life force, or energy) and gong 
(work), indicating that the form works with the individual’s life force. Though 
relatively modern, especially under its current name, the art of qigong is based on 
the Tao yin, an ancient art meant to foster mental and physical well-being. 

The practice began to appear in reports on training and martial arts at the 
beginning of the twentieth century, and by the 1930s was being used in hospitals. 
The Chinese government later popularized it, as it had done with tai chi. 

Qigong involves static and dynamic physical exercises that stimulate 
respiration in a standing, seated, or reclined position. There are many different 
styles of qigong, but all of them seek to strengthen and regenerate qi. Though its 
movements are typically gentle, the practice is intense. 

Benefits of qigong 

According to numerous international scientific studies, qigong—like tai chi and 
yoga—offers significant health benefits. The following stand out among those 




















































proven through scientific research, as observed by Dr. Kenneth M. Sancier of San 
Francisco’s Qigong Institute in his article “Medical Applications of Qigong”-: 

■ Modification of brain waves 

■ Improved balance of sex hormones 

■ Lower mortality rate from heart attacks 

■ Lower blood pressure in patients with hypertension 

■ Greater bone density 

■ Better circulation 

■ Deceleration of symptoms associated with senility 

■ Greater balance and efficiency of bodily functions 

■ Increased blood flow to the brain and greater mind-body connection 

■ Improved cardiac function 

■ Reduction in the secondary effects of cancer treatments 

Practicing these arts not only keeps us in shape, it also helps extend our lives. 

Methods for practicing qigong 

In order to practice qigong correctly, we should remember that our life energy 
flows through our whole body. We should know how to regulate its many parts: 

1. Tyau Shenn: (regulating the body) by adopting the correct posture—it is 
important to be firmly rooted to the ground 

2. Tyau Shyi : (regulating the breath) until it is calm, steady, and peaceful 

3. Tyau Hsin : (regulating the mind); the most complicated part, as it implies 
emptying the mind of thoughts 

4. Tyau Chi : (regulating the life force) through the regulation of the three prior 
elements, so that it flows naturally 

5. Tyau Shen: (regulating the spirit); the spirit is both strength and root in battle, 
as Yang Jwing-Ming explains in The Essence of Taiji Qigong. - 

In this way, the whole organism will be prepared to work together toward a 
single goal. 


The five elements of qigong 



Une ot qigong s best-known exercises is a series representing the live elements: 
earth, water, wood, metal, and fire. This series of movements seeks to balance the 
five currents of energy in order to improve brain and organ function. 

There are several ways to do these movements. In this case, we’re following 
the model of Professor Maria Isabel Garda Monreal from the Qigong Institute in 
Barcelona. 

EARTH 

1. Stand with your legs apart and your feet directly below your shoulders. 

2. Turn your feet outward slightly to strengthen the posture. 

3. Keep your shoulders relaxed and down and your arms loose at your sides, 
slightly away from your body (this is the Wu Qi, or rooted, posture). 

4. As you inhale, raise your arms in front of you until your hands are level with 
your shoulders, your palms facing down. 

5. Exhale as you bend your knees and bring your arms down until your hands 
are level with your stomach, your palms facing in. 

6. Hold this position for a few seconds, focusing on your breath. 



0 0 



WATER 



1. Starting from Earth posture, bend your knees into a squat, keeping your chest 
upright and exhaling throughout. 

2. Press your coccyx downward to stretch your lumbar spine. 

3. As you inhale, stand to return to Earth posture. 

4. 4. Repeat twice, for a total of three. 



WOOD 

1. Starting from Earth posture, turn your palms upward and open your arms to 
the side, forming a circle as you inhale, until your hands are level with your 
clavicle. Turn your hands so that your palms and elbows point downward, 
while keeping your shoulders relaxed. 

2. Reverse the movement as you exhale, making a downward circle with your 
arms until you reach your initial position. 

3. Repeat twice, for a total of three. 




METAL 

1. Starting from Earth posture, raise your arms until your hands are level with 
your sternum. 

2. Turn your palms toward each other, about four inches apart, with your 
fingers relaxed and slightly separated, pointing upward. 

3. As you inhale, move your hands away from each other until they are shoulder 
width apart. 

4. As you exhale, bring your hands toward each other until they are back in 
position 2. 

5. Repeat twice, for a total of three, observing the concentration of energy as 
you bring your hands together in front of your lungs. 






FIRE 

1. Starting from Earth posture, bring your hands level with your heart as you 
inhale, with one hand slightly above the other and your palms facing each 
other. 

2. Rotate your hands to feel the energy of your heart. 

3. Turn from your waist gently to the left, keeping your torso relaxed and your 
forearms parallel to the ground. 

4. With your palms still facing each other, separate your hands, bringing one up 
until it is level with your shoulder, and the other down in front of your 
abdomen. 

5. Turn from your waist gently to the right, keeping your torso relaxed and your 
forearms parallel to the ground. 

6. As you exhale, let your hands come back together in front of your heart. 

7. With your palms still facing each other, separate your hands, bringing one up 
until it is level with your shoulder, and the other down in front of your 
abdomen. 




COMPLETING THE SERIES 


1. Starting from Earth posture, inhale as you bring your hands level with your 
shoulders, palms facing down. 

2. As you exhale, lower your arms to rest at your sides, returning to the initial 
Wu Qi posture. 



Shiatsu 



































Created in Japan in the early twentieth century, principally for the treatment of 
arthritis, shiatsu also works on energy flow through the application of pressure 
with the thumbs and the palms of the hands. In combination with stretching and 
breathing exercises, it seeks to create equilibrium among the different elements 
of the body. 

It is not important that a Tao Yin* have a name, is imitating something, or is 
engraved in jade. What is important is the technique and the essence of 
what is really practiced. Stretching and contracting, bending and lifting of 
the head, stepping, lying down, resting or standing, walking or stepping 
slowly, screaming or breathing—everything can be a Tao Yin. 

—Ge Hong- 


Breathe better, live longer 

The book Xiuzhen shishu, known in the West as Ten Books on the Cultivation of 
Perfection, dates back to the thirteenth century and is a compendium of materials 
from diverse sources on developing the mind and body. 

It quotes, among others, the celebrated Chinese doctor and essayist Sun 
Simiao, who lived during the sixth century. Sun Simiao was a proponent of a 
technique called the Six Healing Sounds, which involves the coordination of 
movement, breathing, and pronouncing sounds with the purpose of bringing our 
souls to a place of calm. 

The six sounds are: 

Xu, pronounced like “shh” with a deep sigh, which is associated with the liver 
He, pronounced like “her” with a yawn, which is associated with the heart 
Si, pronounced like “sir” with a slow exhale, which is associated with the lungs 
Chui, pronounced like “chwee” with a forceful exhale, which is associated 
with the kidneys 

Hoo, pronounced like “who,” which is associated with the spleen 
Xi, pronounced like “she, ” which connects the whole body 

The following poem by Sun Simiao offers clues about how to live well 
according to the season. It reminds us of the importance of breathing, and 


suggests that as we breathe, we visualize the organs associated with each of the 
healing sounds. 


In spring, breathe xu for clear eyes and so wood can aid your liver. 

In summer, reach for he, so that heart and fire can be at peace. 

In fall, breathe si to stabilize and gather metal, keeping the lungs moist. 

For the kidneys, next, breathe chui and see your inner waters calm. 

The Triple Heater needs your xi to expel all heat and troubles. 

In all four seasons, take deep breaths so your spleen can process food. 

And, of course, avoid exhaling noisily; don’t let even your own ears hear you. 

The practice is most excellent and will help preserve your divine elixir. 

It might feel confusing to be presented with all the Eastern traditions we have 
introduced in this chapter. The takeaway is that they all combine a physical 
exercise with an awareness of our breath. These two components—movement 
and breath—help us to bring our consciousness in line with our body, instead of 
allowing our mind to be carried away by the sea of daily worries. Most of the 
time, we are just not aware enough of our breathing. 




RESILIENCE AND WABI-SABI 

How to face life’s challenges 
without letting stress and worry age 
you 



What is resilience? 


One thing that everyone with a clearly defined ikigai has in common is that they 
pursue their passion no matter what. They never give up, even when the cards 
seem stacked against them or they face one hurdle after another. 

We’re talking about resilience, a concept that has become influential among 
psychologists. 

But resilience isn’t just the ability to persevere. As we’ll see in this chapter, it 
is also an outlook we can cultivate to stay focused on the important things in life 
rather than what is most urgent, and to keep ourselves from being carried away by 
negative emotions. 

In the final section of the chapter, we’ll explore techniques that go beyond 
resilience to cultivate antifragility. 

Sooner or later, we all have to face difficult moments, and the way we do this 
can make a huge difference to our quality of life. Proper training for our mind, 
body, and emotional resilience is essential for confronting life’s ups and downs. 


Nana korobi ya oki "tlzilf 
Fall seven times, rise eight. 

—Japanese proverb 

Resilience is our ability to deal with setbacks. The more resilient we are, the 
easier it will be to pick ourselves up and get back to what gives meaning to our 
lives. 

Resilient people know how to stay focused on their objectives, on what 
matters, without giving in to discouragement. Their flexibility is the source of 
their strength: They know how to adapt to change and to reversals of fortune. 
They concentrate on the things they can control and don’t worry about those they 
can’t. 

In the words of the famous Serenity Prayer by Reinhold Niebuhr: 


God, give us grace to accept with serenity 
the things that cannot be changed, 
Courage to change the things 
which should be changed, 
and the Wisdom to distinguish 


the one from the other. 


Emotional resilience through Buddhism and Stoicism 

Siddhartha Gautama (Buddha) was born a prince of Kapilavastu, Nepal, and grew 
up in a palace, surrounded by riches. At sixteen he married and had a child. 

Not satisfied by his family’s wealth, at twenty-nine he decided to try a 
different lifestyle and ran away from the palace to live as an ascetic. But it wasn’t 
asceticism that he was looking for; it didn’t offer the happiness and well-being he 
sought. Neither wealth nor extreme asceticism worked for him. He realized that a 
wise person should not ignore life’s pleasures. A wise person can live with these 
pleasures but should always remain conscious of how easy it is to be enslaved by 
them. 

Zeno of Citium began his studies with the Cynics. The Cynics also led ascetic 
lives, leaving behind all earthly pleasures. They lived in the street, and the only 
thing they owned was the clothing on their backs. 

Seeing that Cynicism did not give him a sense of well-being, Zeno abandoned 
its teachings to found the school of Stoicism, which centers on the idea that there 
is nothing wrong with enjoying life’s pleasures as long as they do not take control 
of your life as you enjoy them. You have to be prepared for those pleasures to 
disappear. 

The goal is not to eliminate all feelings and pleasures from our lives, as in 
Cynicism, but to eliminate negative emotions. 

Since their inception, one of the objectives of both Buddhism and Stoicism 
has been to control pleasure, emotions, and desires. Though the philosophies are 
very different, both aim to curb our ego and control our negative emotions. 

Both Stoicism and Buddhism are, at their roots, methods for practicing well¬ 
being. 

According to Stoicism, our pleasures and desires are not the problem. We can 
enjoy them as long as they don’t take control of us. The Stoics viewed those who 
were able to control their emotions as virtuous. 


What’s the worst thing that could happen? 

We finally land our dream job, but after a little while we are already hunting for a 
better one. We win the lottery and buy a nice car but then decide we can’t live 


without a sailboat. We finally win the heart of the man or woman we’ve been 
pining for and suddenly find we have a wandering eye. 

People can be insatiable. 

The Stoics believed that these kinds of desires and ambitions are not worth 
pursuing. The objective of the virtuous person is to reach a state of tranquility 
(apatheia): the absence of negative feelings such as anxiety, fear, shame, vanity, 
and anger, and the presence of positive feelings such as happiness, love, serenity, 
and gratitude. 

In order to keep their minds virtuous, the Stoics practiced something like 
negative visualization: They imagined the worst thing that could happen in order 
to be prepared if certain privileges and pleasures were taken from them. 

To practice negative visualization, we have to reflect on negative events, but 
without worrying about them. 

Seneca, one of the richest men in ancient Rome, lived a life of luxury but was, 
nonetheless, an active Stoic. He recommended practicing negative visualization 
every night before falling asleep. In fact, he not only imagined these negative 
situations, he actually put them into practice—for example, by living for a week 
without servants, or the food and drink he was used to as a wealthy man. As a 
result, he was able to answer the question “What’s the worst thing that could 
happen?” 


Meditating for healthier emotions 

In addition to negative visualization and not giving in to negative emotions, 
another central tenet of Stoicism is knowing what we can control and what we 
can’t , as we see in the Serenity Prayer. 

Worrying about things that are beyond our control accomplishes nothing. We 
should have a clear sense of what we can change and what we can’t, which in turn 
will allow us to resist giving in to negative emotions. 

In the words of Epictetus, “It’s not what happens to you, but how you react that 
matter s.”- 

In Zen Buddhism, meditation is a way to become aware of our desires and 
emotions and thereby free ourselves from them. It is not simply a question of 
keeping the mind free of thoughts but instead involves observing our thoughts 
and emotions as they appear, without getting carried away by them. In this way, 
we train our minds not to get swept up in anger, jealousy, or resentment. 


One of the most commonly used mantras in Buddhism focuses on controlling 
negative emotions: “Om mani padme hum in which om is the generosity that 
purifies the ego, ma is the ethics that purifies jealousy, ni is the patience that 
purifies passion and desire, pad is the precision that purifies bias, me is the 
surrender that purifies greed, and hum is the wisdom that purifies hatred. 


The here and now, and the impermanence of things 

Another key to cultivating resilience is knowing in which time to live. Both 
Buddhism and Stoicism remind us that the present is all that exists, and it is the 
only thing we can control. Instead of worrying about the past or the future, we 
should appreciate things just as they are in the moment, in the now. 

“The only moment in which you can be truly alive is the present moment,” 
observes the Buddhist monk Thich Nhat Hanh. 

In addition to living in the here and now, the Stoics recommend reflecting on 
the impermanence of the things around us. 

The Roman emperor Marcus Aurelius said that the things we love are like the 
leaves of a tree: They can fall at any moment with a gust of wind. He also said 
that changes in the world around us are not accidental but rather form part of the 
essence of the universe—a rather Buddhist notion, in fact. 

We should never forget that everything we have and all the people we love will 
disappear at some point. This is something we should keep in mind, but without 
giving in to pessimism. Being aware of the impermanence of things does not have 
to make us sad; it should help us love the present moment and those who 
surround us. 

“All things human are short-lived and perishable,” Seneca tells us.= 

The temporary, ephemeral, and impermanent nature of the world is central to 
every Buddhist discipline. Keeping this always in mind helps us avoid excessive 
pain in times of loss. 


Wabi-sabi and ichi-go ichi-e 

Wabi-sabi is a Japanese concept that shows us the beauty of the fleeting, 
changeable, and imperfect nature of the world around us. Instead of searching for 
beauty in perfection, we should look for it in things that are flawed, incomplete. 

t u ic ic vxzfvtr TononACA nlopp ci 1 r&gt;\~\ rmliiA fr\r AvomnlA r\n on i rromil o r rvr 


JL JLJLJLO lO VV11J LJLJLV^ J CipClllL/O piClV^V^ OULU VCllUA^, IUI V^TVClllipiV^, Wll Clll 11 1LilCll UI 

cracked teacup. Only things that are imperfect, incomplete, and ephemeral can 
truly be beautiful, because only those things resemble the natural world. 

A complementary Japanese concept is that of ichi-go ichi-e, which could be 
translated as “This moment exists only now and won’t come again.” It is heard 
most often in social gatherings as a reminder that each encounter—whether with 
friends, family, or strangers—is unique and will never be repeated, meaning that 
we should enjoy the moment and not lose ourselves in worries about the past or 
the future. 

The concept is commonly used in tea ceremonies, Zen meditation, and 
Japanese martial arts, all of which place emphasis on being present in the 
moment. 

In the West, we’ve grown accustomed to the permanence of the stone 
buildings and cathedrals of Europe, which sometimes gives us the sense that 
nothing changes, making us forget about the passage of time. Greco-Roman 
architecture adores symmetry, sharp lines, imposing facades, and buildings and 
statues of the gods that outlast the centuries. 

Japanese architecture, on the other hand, doesn’t try to be imposing or perfect, 
because it is built in the spirit of wabi-sabi. The tradition of making structures out 
of wood presupposes their impermanence and the need for future generations to 
rebuild them. Japanese culture accepts the fleeting nature of the human being and 
everything we create. 

The Grand Shrine of Ise,- for example, has been rebuilt every twenty years for 
centuries. The most important thing is not to keep the building standing for 
generations, but to preserve customs and traditions—things that can withstand the 
passage of time better than structures made by human hands. 

The key is to accept that there are certain things over which we have no 
control, like the passage of time and the ephemeral nature of the world around us. 

Ichi-go ichi-e teaches us to focus on the present and enjoy each moment that 
life brings us. This is why it is so important to find and pursue our ikigai. 

Wabi-sabi teaches us to appreciate the beauty of imperfection as an 
opportunity for growth. 


Beyond resilience: Antifragility 

As the legend goes, the first time Hercules faced the Hydra, he despaired when 
he discovered that cutting off one of its heads meant that two would grow back in 


its place. He would never be able to kill the beast if it got stronger with every 
wound. 

As Nassim Nicholas Taleb explains in Antifragile: Things That Gain from 
Disorder,- we use the word fragile to describe people, things, and organizations 
that are weakened when harmed, and the words robust and resilient for things that 
are able to withstand harm without weakening, but we don’t have a word for 
things that get stronger when harmed (up to a point). 

To refer to the kind of power possessed by the Hydra of Lerna, to talk about 
things that get stronger when they are harmed, Taleb proposes the term 
antifragile: “Antifragility is beyond resilience or robustness. The resilient resists 
shocks and stays the same; the antifragile gets better.” 

Catastrophes and exceptional circumstances offer good models for explaining 
antifragility. In 2011 a tsunami hit the Tohoku region of Japan, doing tremendous 
damage to dozens of cities and towns along the coast, most famously Fukushima. 

When we visited the affected coast two years after the catastrophe, having 
driven for hours along cracked highways and past one empty gas station after 
another, we passed through several ghost towns whose streets had been taken over 
by the remnants of houses, piles of cars, and empty train stations. These towns 
were fragile spaces that had been forgotten by the government and could not 
recover on their own. 

Other places, such as Ishinomaki and Kesennuma, suffered extensive damage 
but were rebuilt within a few years, thanks to the efforts of many. Ishinomaki and 
Kesennuma showed how resilient they were in their ability to return to normal 
after the catastrophe. 

The earthquake that caused the tsunami also affected the Fukushima nuclear 
power plant. The Tokyo Electric Power Company engineers working at the plant 
were not prepared to recover from that kind of damage. The Fukushima nuclear 
facility is still in a state of emergency and will be for decades to come. It 
demonstrated its fragility in the face of an unprecedented catastrophe. 

The Japanese financial markets closed minutes after the earthquake. Which 
businesses did the best in the aftermath? Stock in big construction companies has 
been steadily on the rise since 2011; the need to rebuild the entire coast of 
Tohoku is a boon for construction. In this case, Japanese construction companies 
are antifragile, since they benefited enormously from the catastrophe. 

Now let’s take a look at how we can apply this concept to our daily lives. How 
can we be more antifragile? 


btep i: ureate reaunaancies 

Instead of having a single salary, try to find a way to make money from your 
hobbies, at other jobs, or by starting your own business. If you have only one 
salary, you might be left with nothing should your employer run into trouble, 
leaving you in a position of fragility. On the other hand, if you have several 
options and you lose your primary job, it might just happen that you end up 
dedicating more time to your secondary job, and maybe even make more money 
at it. You would have beaten that stroke of bad luck and would be, in that case, 
antifragile. 

One hundred percent of the seniors we interviewed in Ogimi had a primary 
and a secondary occupation. Most of them kept a vegetable garden as a secondary 
job, and sold their produce at the local market. 

The same idea goes for friendships and personal interests. It’s just a matter, as 
the saying goes, of not putting all your eggs in one basket. 

In the sphere of romantic relationships, there are those who focus all their 
energy on their partner and make him or her their whole world. Those people lose 
everything if the relationship doesn’t work out, whereas if they’ve cultivated 
strong friendships and a full life along the way, they’ll be in a better position to 
move on at the end of a relationship. They’ll be antifragile. 

Right now you might be thinking, “I don’t need more than one salary, and I’m 
happy with the friends I’ve always had. Why should I add anything new?” It might 
seem like a waste of time to add variation to our lives, because extraordinary 
things don’t ordinarily happen. We slip into a comfort zone. But the unexpected 
always happens, sooner or later. 

Step 2: Bet conservatively in certain areas and take many small 
risks in others 

The world of finance turns out to be very useful in explaining this concept. If you 
have $10,000 saved up, you might put $9,000 of that into an index fund or fixed- 
term deposit, and invest the remaining $1,000 in ten start-ups with huge growth 
potential—say, $100 in each. 

One possible scenario is that three of the companies fail (you lose $300), the 
value of three other companies goes down (you lose another $100 or $200), the 
value of three goes up (you make $100 or $200), and the value of one of the start¬ 
ups increases twenty-fold (you make nearly $2,000, or maybe even more). 

You still make money, even if three of the businesses go completely belly-up. 

\/^ /-vi -i \ r/"v Tv /-v /-v 4- /-v d 4- Tv /-v /-\ /-» vv-» /"v/-v TIt- z-v 4- Tv /~v T_It t/4 



i uu vc uciicincu iium me uamage, juj&gt;l iijvc uic rxyuia.. 

The key to becoming antifragile is taking on small risks that might lead to 
great reward, without exposing ourselves to dangers that might sink us, such as 
investing $10,000 in a fund of questionable reputation that we saw advertised in 
the newspaper. 

Step 3: Get rid of the things that make you fragile 

We’re taking the negative route for this exercise. Ask yourself: What makes me 
fragile? Certain people, things, and habits generate losses for us and make us 
vulnerable. Who and what are they? 

When we make our New Year’s resolutions, we tend to emphasize adding new 
challenges to our lives. It’s great to have this kind of objective, but setting “good 
riddance” goals can have an even bigger impact. For example: 

■ Stop snacking between meals 

■ Eat sweets only once a week 

■ Gradually pay off all debt 

■ Avoid spending time with toxic people 

■ Avoid spending time doing things we don’t enjoy, simply because we feel 
obligated to do them 

■ Spend no more than twenty minutes on Facebook per day 

To build resilience into our lives, we shouldn’t fear adversity, because each 
setback is an opportunity for growth. If we adopt an antifragile attitude, we’ll find 
a way to get stronger with every blow, refining our lifestyle and staying focused 
on our ikigai. 

Taking a hit or two can be viewed as either a misfortune or an experience that 
we can apply to all areas of our lives, as we continually make corrections and set 
new and better goals. As Taleb writes in Antifragile, “We need randomness, mess, 
adventures, uncertainty, self-discovery, hear traumatic episodes, all these things 
that make life worth living.” We encourage those interested in the concept of 
antifragility to read Nassim Nicholas Taleb’s Antifragile. 

Life is pure imperfection, as the philosophy of wabi-sabi teaches us, and the 
passage of time shows us that everything is fleeting, but if you have a clear sense 
of your ikigai, each moment will hold so many possibilities that it will seem 
almost like an eternity. 



EPILOGUE 


Ikigai : The art of living 


Mitsuo Aida was one of the most important calligraphers and haikuists of the 
twentieth century. He is yet another example of a Japanese person who dedicated 
his life to a very specific ikigai: communicating emotions with seventeen-syllable 
poems, using a shodo calligraphy brush. 

Many of Aida’s haikus philosophize about the importance of the present 
moment, and the passage of time. The poem reproduced below could be 
translated as “In the here and now, the only thing in my life is your life.” 

Ulk &lt;_ &lt;_ L U \ ^Otz. U 
CDlUDS^^/cCDlUDS 

In another poem, Aida writes simply, “Here, now.” It is an artwork that seeks 
to evoke feelings of mono no aware (a melancholy appreciation of the 
ephemeral). 


US 


The following poem touches on one of the secrets of bringing ikigai into our 
lives: “Happiness is always determined by your heart.” 




This last one, also by Aida, means “Keep going; don’t change your path.” 





Once you discover your ikigai, pursuing it and nurturing it every day will bring 
meaning to your life. The moment your life has this purpose, you will achieve a 
happy state of flow in all you do, like the calligrapher at his canvas or the chef 
who, after half a century, still prepares sushi for his patrons with love. 


Conclusion 

Our ikigai is different for all of us, but one thing we have in common is that we 
are all searching for meaning. When we spend our days feeling connected to what 
is meaningful to us, we live more fully; when we lose the connection, we feel 
despair. 

Modem life estranges us more and more from our true nature, making it very 
easy for us to lead lives lacking in meaning. Powerful forces and incentives 
(money, power, attention, success) distract us on a daily basis; don’t let them take 
over your life. 

Our intuition and curiosity are very powerful internal compasses to help us 
connect with our ikigai. Follow those things you enjoy, and get away from or 
change those you dislike. Be led by your curiosity, and keep busy by doing things 
that fill you with meaning and happiness. It doesn’t need to be a big thing: we 
might find meaning in being good parents or in helping our neighbors. 

There is no perfect strategy to connecting with our ikigai. But what we learned 
from the Okinawans is that we should not worry too much about finding it. 

Life is not a problem to be solved. Just remember to have something that 
keeps you busy doing what you love while being surrounded by the people who 
love you. 


The ten rules of ikigai 

We’ll conclude this journey with ten rules we’ve distilled from the wisdom of the 
long-living residents of Ogimi: 


1. Stay active; don’t retire. Those who give up the things they love doing and 
do well lose their purpose in life. That’s why it’s so important to keep doing 
things of value, making progress, bringing beauty or utility to others, helping 
out, and shaping the world around you, even after your ‘‘official” professional 
activity has ended. 

2. Take it slow. Being in a hurry is inversely proportional to quality of life. As 
the old saying goes, “Walk slowly and you’ll go far.” When we leave urgency 
behind, life and time take on new meaning. 

3. Don’t fill your stomach. Less is more when it comes to eating for long life, 
too. According to the 80 percent rule, in order to stay healthier longer, we should 
eat a little less than our hunger demands instead of stuffing ourselves. 

4. Surround yourself with good friends. Friends are the best medicine, 
there for confiding worries over a good chat, sharing stories that brighten your 
day, getting advice, having fun, dreaming ... in other words, living. 

5. Get in shape for your next birthday. Water moves; it is at its best when it 
flows fresh and doesn’t stagnate. The body you move through life in needs a bit 
of daily maintenance to keep it running for a long time. Plus, exercise releases 
hormones that make us feel happy. 

6. Smile. A cheerful attitude is not only relaxing—it also helps make friends. 
It’s good to recognize the things that aren’t so great, but we should never forget 
what a privilege it is to be in the here and now in a world so full of possibilities. 

7. Reconnect with nature. Though most people live in cities these days, 
human beings are made to be part of the natural world. We should return to it 
often to recharge our batteries. 

8. Give thanks. To your ancestors, to nature, which provides you with the air 
you breathe and the food you eat, to your friends and family, to everything that 
brightens your days and makes you feel lucky to be alive. Spend a moment every 
day giving thanks, and you’ll watch your stockpile of happiness grow. 

9. Live in the moment. Stop regretting the past and fearing the future. Today 
is all you have. Make the most of it. Make it worth remembering. 

10. Follow your ikigai. There is a passion inside you, a unique talent that 
gives meaning to your days and drives you to share the best of yourself until the 
very end. If you don’t know what your ikigai is yet, as Viktor Frankl says, your 
mission is to discover it. 

The authors of this book wish you a long, happy, and purposeful life. 

Thank you for joining us, 


Hector Garcia and Francesc mtrau.es 



&lt;NI ml tM i/-&gt;| sol M i-h| (Nl ml ml 


NOTES 


Chapter I. Ikigai 

1 Dan Buettner. The Blue Zones: Lessons for Living Longer from the People Who’ve Lived the Longest. 
People in all Blue Zones (except Adventists) drink alcohol moderately and regularly. Moderate drinkers 
outlive nondrinkers. The trick is to drink 1-2 glasses per day (preferably Sardinian Cannonau wine), 
with friends and/or with food. And no, you can’t save up all week and have 14 drinks on Saturday. 
Retrieved via https://www.bluezones.com/2016/1 l/power-9/#sthash.4LTcONED.dpuf. 

Chapter II. Antiaging Secrets 

1_ Eduard Punset. Interview with Shlomo Breznitz for Redes, RTVE (Radio Television Espanola). 

Retrieved via http://www.rtve.es/television/20101024/pon-forma-tu-cerebro/364676.shtml. 

2 Howard S. Friedman and Leslie R. Martin. The Longevity Project: Surprising Discoveries for Health and 
Long Life from the Landmark Eight-Decade Study. Retrieved via http ://www. penguin 
randomhouse.com/books/307681/the-longevity-project-by-howard-s-friedman/9780452297708/. 

Chapter III. From Logotherapy to Ikigai 

1 Viktor E. Frankl, Richard Winston (translator), Clara Winston. The Doctor and the Soul: From 
Psychotherapy to Logotherapy. Vintage, 1986. 

Viktor E. Frankl. Man’s Search for Ultimate Meaning. Basic Books, 2000. 

Ibid. 

Viktor E. Frankl. The Will to Meaning: Foundations and Applications of Logotherapy. Meridian/Plume, 
1988. 

Shoma Morita. Morita Therapy and the True Nature of Anxiety-Based Disorders. State University of New 
York Press, 1998. 

Thich Nhat Hanh. The Miracle of Mindfulness: An Introduction to the Practice of Meditation. Beacon 
Press, 1996. 

Morita. Morita Therapy. 


Chapter IV. Find Flow in Everything You Do 

“Crafting Fun User Experiences: A Method to Facilitate Flow—A Conversation with Owen Schaffer.” 
Retrieved via human factors.com/whitepapers/crafting_fun_ux.asp. 

Ernest Hemingway. On Writing. Scribner, 1984. 

Bertrand Russell. Unpopular Essays. Routledge, 2009. 

The Collected Papers of Albert Einstein, vol. 1. Princeton University Press, 1987. 

Eyal Ophir, Clifford Nass, and Anthony D. Wagner, “Cognitive Control in Media Multitaskers.” 
Retrieved via www.pnas.org/content/106/37/15583.full. 


|VO 100 |~-J |ON 


6 Sara Thomee, Annika Harenstam, and Mats Hagberg, “Mobile Phone Use and Stress, Sleep 
Disturbances, and Symptoms of Depression Among Young Adults—A Prospective Cohort Study.” 
Retrieved via https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3042390/. 

7 Nobuyuki Hayashi. Idainaru Kurieteabu Derekuta No Kiseki. [Steve Jobs: The Greatest Creative 
Director] ASCII Media Works, 2007. It has not been translated into English. 

8 Richard P. Feynman. “What Do You Care What Other People Think?”: Further Adventures of a Curious 
Character. W. W. Norton, 2001. 

Chapter V. Masters of Longevity 

1 Emma Innes, “The secret to a long life? Sushi and sleep, according to the world’s oldest woman,” Daily 
Mail. Retrieved via http://www.dailymail.co.uk/health/article-2572316/The-secret-long-life-Sushi-sleep- 
according-worlds-oldest-woman.html. 

2 “Muere a los 116 la mujer mas longeva segun el Libro Guinness de los Records,” El Pals. Retrieved via 
http://elpais.eom/elpais/2006/08/28/aetualidad/l 156747730_850215.html. 

3 Supercentenarians. Editors: H. Maier, J. Gampe, B. Jeune, J. W. Vaupel, J.-M. Robine. Springer-Verlag, 
2010 . 

4 David Batty, “World’s oldest man dies at 114,” The Guardian. Retrieved via 
https://www.theguardian.com/world/201 l/apr/15/world-oldest-man-dies-at-114. 

5 Ralph Blumenthal, “World’s Oldest Man, Though Only Briefly, Dies at 111 in New York,” New York 
Times. Retrieved via https://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/09/nyregion/worlds-oldest-man-though-only- 
briefly-dies-at-111-in-new-york.html?. 

Henry D. Smith. Hokusai: One Hundred Views of Mt. Fuji. George Braziller, Inc., 1988. 

“Old Masters at the Top of Their Game,” New York Times Magazine. Retrieved via 
http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2014/10/23/magazine/old-masters-at-top-of-their-game.html?_r=0. 
Ibid. 

Toshio Ban. The Osamu Tezuka Story: A Life in Manga and Anime. Stone Bridge Press, 2016. 

10 Rosamund C. Barnett and Caryl Rivers. The Age of Longevity: Re-Imagining Tomorrow for Our New 
Long Lives. Rowman &amp; Littlefield Publishers, 2016. 

11 “Old Masters at the Top of Their Game,” New York Times Magazine. 

12 Ibid. 

13 Ibid. 

14 Ibid. 

15 Ibid. 

Chapter VI. Lessons from Japan’s Centenarians 

1 Strictly speaking, Shinto means “the way of the kami.” In Japanese, kami refers to spirits or phenomena 
that coexist with us in nature. 

2 Washington Burnap. The Sphere and Duties of Woman: A Course of Lectures (1848). Retrieved via 
https://archive-org/details/spheredutiesofwoOOburn. 

Chapter VII. The Ikigai Diet 

1 Bradley J. Willcox, D. Craig Willcox, and Makoto Suzuki. The Okinawa Program: How the World’s 
Longest-Lived People Achieve Everlasting Health—and How You Can Too. Retrieved via 
http ://www.penguinrandomhouse.com/books/190921 /the-okinawa-program-by-bradley-j -willcox-md-d- 
craig-willcox-phd-makoto-suzuki-md-foreword-by-andrew-weil-md/. 


2 Luigi Fontana, Edward P. Weiss, Dennis T. Villareal, Samuel Klein, and John O. Holloszy. “Long-term 
Effects of Calorie or Protein Restriction on Serum IGF-1 and IGFBP-3 Concentration in Humans.” 
Retrieved via https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2673798/. 

3 Edda Cava and Luigi Fontana. “Will Calorie Restriction Work in Humans?” Retrieved via 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3765579/. 

4 W. E. Bronner and G. R. Beecher. “Method for Determining the Content of Catechins in Tea Infusions 
by High-Performance Liquid Chromatography.” Retrieved via 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9618918. 

Chapter VIII. Gentle Movements, Longer Life 

1 “Sitting Is the New Smoking,” Start Standing. Retrieved via http://www.startstanding.org/sitting-new- 
smoking/. 

2 Brigid Schulte, “Health Experts Have Figured Out How Much Time You Should Sit Each Day,” 
Washington Post. Retrieved via https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2015/06/02/medical- 
researchers-have-figured-out-how-much-time-is-okay-to-spend-sitting-each-day/? 
utm_term=.d9d8df01a807. 

3 Kenneth M. Sancier, PhD, “Medical Applications of Qigong,” Alternative Therapies, January 1996(vol. 
2, no. 1). Retrieved via http://www.ichikung.com/pdf/MedicalApplicationsQi gong.pdf. 

4 Yang Jwing-Ming. The Essence of Taiji Qigong. YMAA Publication Center, 1998. 

5 Ge Hong (AD 284-364). Retrieved via https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ge_Hong. 

Chapter IX. Resilience and Wabi-sabi 

4 Epictetus. Discourses and Selected Writings. Penguin, 2008. 

2 Seneca. Letters from a Stoic. Penguin, 2015. 

3 “Ise Shrine,” Encyclopaedia Britannica. Retrieved via https://www.britannica.com/topic/Ise-Shrine. 

4 Nassim Nicholas Taleb. Antifragile: Things That Gain from Disorder. Random House, 2014. 


SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING 


The authors of Ikigai were greatly inspired by: 

Breznitz, Shlomo, and Collins Hemingway. Maximum Brainpower: Challenging 
the Brain for Health and Wisdom. Ballantine Books, 2012. 

Buettner, Dan. The Blue Zones: Lessons for Living Longer from the People Who’ve 
Lived the Longest. Retrieved via http://www.bluezones.com/2016/ll/power- 
9/#sthash.4LTcONED.dpuf. 

Csikszentmihalyi, Mihaly. Flow: The Psychology of Optimal Experience. Harper 
Perennial, 1990. 

Frankl, Viktor E. The Doctor and the Soul: From Psychotherapy to Logotherapy. 
Vintage, 1986. 

-. Man’s Search for Ultimate Meaning. Basic Books, 2000. 

-. The Will to Meaning: Foundations and Applications of Logotherapy. 

Meridian/Plume, 1988. 

Friedman, Howard S., and Leslie R. Martin. The Longevity Project: Surprising 
Discoveries for Health and Long Life from the Landmark Eight-Decade Study. 
Plume, 2012. 

Morita, Shoma. Morita Therapy and the True Nature of Anxiety-Based Disorders. 

State University of New York Press, 1998. 

Taleb, Nassim Nicholas. Incerto series: Fooled by Randomness, The Black Swan, 
The Bed of Procrustes, Anti fragile. Random House, 2012. 

Willcox, Bradley J., D. Craig Willcox, and Makoto Suzuki. The Okinawa Diet 
Plan: Get Leaner, Live Longer, and Never Feel Hungry. Clarkson Potter, 2001. 



ABOUT THE AUTHORS 


Hector Garcia is a citizen of Japan, where he has lived for over a decade, and of 
Spain, where he was bom. A former software engineer, he worked at CERN in 
Switzerland before moving to Japan, where he developed voice recognition 
software and the technology needed for Silicon Valley start-ups to enter the 
Japanese market. He is the creator of the popular blog kirainet.com and the 
author of A Geek in Japan, a #1 bestseller in Japan. 

Francesc Miralles is an award-winning author who has written a number of 
bestselling self-help and inspirational books. Born in Barcelona, he studied 
journalism, English literature, and German, and has worked as an editor, a 
translator, a ghostwriter, and a musician. His novel Love in Lowercase has been 
translated into twenty languages. 




Penguin 
Random House 

PENGUIN PUBLISHING GROUP 


What’s next on 
your reading list? 

Discover your next 

great read! 


Get personalized book picks and up-to-date news about this author. 

Sign up now. 







English translation by Steven Tolliver. 


* Tao Yin\ general term referring to the ancient arts meant to foster mental and physical well-being. 
http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/authors/search/?query=Ge,+Hong. 


</pre>
* 



I K I G A I 

The Japanese Secret 
to a Long and Happy Life 


HECTOR GARCIA AND FRANCESC MIRALLES 



IKIGAI 

The Japanese Secret to 
a Long and Happy Life 

Hector Garda 
and Francesc Miralles 

Translated by Heather Cleary 



PENGUIN BOOKS 


PENGUIN BOOKS 

An imprint of Penguin Random House LLC 


375 Hudson Street 


New York, New York 10014 
penguin.com 

Copyright © 2016 by Hector Garcia and Francesc Miralles Translation copyright © 2017 by Penguin Random House LLC 
Penguin supports copyright. Copyright fuels creativity, encourages diverse voices, promotes free speech, and creates a vibrant culture. 
Thank you for buying an authorized edition of this book and for complying with copyright laws by not reproducing, scanning, or 
distributing any part of it in any form without permission. You are supporting writers and allowing Penguin to continue to publish books 
for every reader. 

Originally published in Spanish as Ikigai: Los secretos de Japon para una vida larga y feliz by Ediciones Urano, Barcelona. 

Illustration here : Abbie/Shutterstock All other illustrations copyright © 2016 by Marisa Martinez Graphics copyright © 2016 by Flora 
Buki 

library of congress cataloging-in-publication data Names: Garcia, Hector, 1981- author. I Miralles, Francesc, 1968- author. 

Title: Ikigai: the Japanese secret to a long and happy life / Hector Garcia and Francesc Miralles ; translated by Heather Cleary. 

Other titles: Ikigai. English 

Description: New York : Penguin Books, [2017] I Originally published in Spanish as “Ikigai: Los secretos de Japon para una vida larga y 
feliz” by Ediciones Urano in 2016." I Includes bibliographical references. I Description based on print version record and CIP data 
provided by publisher; resource not viewed. 

Identifiers: LCCN 2017005811 (print) I LCCN 2017022599 (ebook) I ISBN 9781524704551 (ebook) I ISBN 9780143130727 
(hardcover) Subjects: LCSH: Longevity—Japan. I Longevity. I Happiness. I Quality of life Classification: LCC RA776.75 (ebook) I LCC 
RA776.75 .G3713 2017 (print) I DDC 613—dc23 
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2017005811 

Neither the publisher nor the author is engaged in rendering professional advice or services to the individual reader. The ideas, 
procedures, and suggestions contained in this book are not intended as a substitute for consulting with your physician. All matters 
regarding your health require medical supervision. Neither the author nor the publisher shall be liable or responsible for any loss or 
damage allegedly arising from any information or suggestion in this book. 

While the author has made every effort to provide accurate telephone numbers, Internet addresses, and other contact information at the 
time of publication, neither the publisher nor the author assumes any responsibility for errors or for changes that occur after publication. 
Further, the publisher does not have any control over and does not assume any responsibility for author or third-party Web sites or their 
content. 


Cover illustration by Olga Grlic 
Cover art direction by Roseanne Serra 


Version_2 



For my brother, Aitor, 

who’s said to me more often than anyone else, 
“I don’t know what to do with my life. ” 

—Hector Garcia 


For all my past, present, and future friends, 
for being my home and my motivation along 
the way. 

—Francesc Miralles 



Only staying active will make you want to live a hundred years. 


—Japanese proverb 



CONTENTS 


Title Page 

Copyright 

Dedication 


Epigraph 

Prologue 

Ikigai: A mysterious word 

I. Ikigai 

The art of staying young while growing old 

II. Antiaging Secrets 

Little things that add up to a long and happy life 

III. From Logotherapy to Ikisai 

How to live longer and better by finding your purpose 

IV. Find Flow in Everything You Do 

How to turn work and free time into spaces for growth 

V. Masters of Longevity 

Words of wisdom from the longest-living people in the world 


















VI. Lessons from Japan’s Centenarians 
Traditions and proverbs for happiness and longevity 


VII. The Ikisai Diet 

What the world’s longest-living people eat and drink 

VIII. Gentle Movements. Longer Life 

Exercises from the East that promote health and longevity 

IX. Resilience and Wabi-sabi 

How to face life’s challenges without letting stress and worry age you 

Epilogue 

Hagai : The art of living 

Notes 


Suggestions for further reading 

About the Authors 















PROLOGUE 


Ikigai : A mysterious word 


This book first came into being on a rainy night in Tokyo, when its authors sat 
down together for the first time in one of the city’s tiny bars. 

We had read each other’s work but had never met, thanks to the thousands of 
miles that separate Barcelona from the capital of Japan. Then a mutual 
acquaintance put us in touch, launching a friendship that led to this project and 
seems destined to last a lifetime. 

The next time we got together, a year later, we strolled through a park in 
downtown Tokyo and ended up talking about trends in Western psychology, 
specifically logotherapy, which helps people find their purpose in life. 

We remarked that Viktor Frankl’s logotherapy had gone out of fashion among 
practicing therapists, who favored other schools of psychology, though people 
still search for meaning in what they do and how they live. We ask ourselves 
things like: 

What is the meaning of my life? 

Is the point just to live longer, or should I seek a higher purpose? 

Why do some people know what they want and have a passion for life, while 
others languish in confusion? 

At some point in our conversation, the mysterious word ikigai came up. 

This Japanese concept, which translates roughly as “the happiness of always 
being busy,” is like logotherapy, but it goes a step beyond. It also seems to be one 
way of explaining the extraordinary longevity of the Japanese, especially on the 
island of Okinawa, where there are 24.55 people over the age of 100 for every 
100,000 inhabitants—far more than the global average. 

Those who study why the inhabitants of this island in the south of Japan live 
longer than people anywhere else in the world believe that one of the keys—in 



addition to a healthful diet, a simple life in the outdoors, green tea, and the 
subtropical climate (its average temperature is like that of Hawaii)—is the ikigai 
that shapes their lives. 

While researching this concept, we discovered that not a single book in the 
fields of psychology or personal development is dedicated to bringing this 
philosophy to the West. 

Is ikigai the reason there are more centenarians in Okinawa than anywhere 
else? How does it inspire people to stay active until the very end? What is the 
secret to a long and happy life? 

As we explored the matter further, we discovered that one place in particular, 
Ogimi, a rural town on the north end of the island with a population of three 
thousand, boasts the highest life expectancy in the world—a fact that has earned 
it the nickname the Village of Longevity. 

Okinawa is where most of Japan’s shikuwasa —a limelike fruit that packs an 
extraordinary antioxidant punch—comes from. Could that be Ogimi’s secret to 
long life? Or is it the purity of the water used to brew its Moringa tea? 

We decided to go study the secrets of the Japanese centenarians in person. 
After a year of preliminary research we arrived in the village—where residents 
speak an ancient dialect and practice an animist religion that features long-haired 
forest sprites called bunagaya—with our cameras and recording devices in hand. 
As soon as we arrived we could sense the incredible friendliness of its residents, 
who laughed and joked incessantly amid lush green hills fed by crystalline waters. 

As we conducted our interviews with the eldest residents of the town, we 
realized that something far more powerful than just these natural resources was at 
work: an uncommon joy flows from its inhabitants and guides them through the 
long and pleasurable journey of their lives. 

Again, the mysterious ikigai. 

But what is it, exactly? How do you get it? 

It never ceased to surprise us that this haven of nearly eternal life was located 
precisely in Okinawa, where two hundred thousand innocent lives were lost at the 
end of World War II. Rather than harbor animosity toward outsiders, however, 
Okinawans live by the principle of ichariba chode, a local expression that means 
“treat everyone like a brother, even if you’ve never met them before.” 

It turns out that one of the secrets to happiness of Ogimi’s residents is feeling 
like part of a community. From an early age they practice yuimaaru, or 
teamwork, and so are used to helping one another. 



Nurturing friendships, eating light, getting enough rest, and doing regular, 
moderate exercise are all part of the equation of good health, but at the heart of 
the joie de vivre that inspires these centenarians to keep celebrating birthdays and 
cherishing each new day is their ikigai. 

The purpose of this book is to bring the secrets of Japan’s centenarians to you 
and give you the tools to find your own ikigai. 

Because those who discover their ikigai have everything they need for a long 
and joyful journey through life. 

Happy travels! 

Hector Garcia and Francesc Mirau.es 



I 


IKIGAI 

The art of staying young while 
growing old 



What is your reason for being? 

According to the Japanese, everyone has an ikigai —what a French philosopher 
might call a raison d’etre. Some people have found their ikigai, while others are 
still looking, though they carry it within them. 

Our ikigai is hidden deep inside each of us, and finding it requires a patient 
search. According to those born on Okinawa, the island with the most 
centenarians in the world, our ikigai is the reason we get up in the morning. 







Whatever you do, don’t retire! 

Having a clearly defined ikigai brings satisfaction, happiness, and meaning to our 
lives. The purpose of this book is to help you find yours, and to share insights 
from Japanese philosophy on the lasting health of body, mind, and spirit. 

One surprising thing you notice, living in Japan, is how active people remain 
after they retire. In fact, many Japanese people never really retire—they keep 
doing what they love for as long as their health allows. 

There is, in fact, no word in Japanese that means retire in the sense of “leaving 
the workforce for good” as in English. According to Dan Buettner, a National 
Geographic reporter who knows the country well, having a purpose in life is so 
important in Japanese culture that our idea of retirement simply doesn’t exist 
there. 


The island of (almost) eternal youth 

Certain longevity studies suggest that a strong sense of community and a clearly 
defined ikigai are just as important as the famously healthful Japanese diet— 
perhaps even more so. Recent medical studies of centenarians from Okinawa and 
other so-called Blue Zones—the geographic regions where people live longest— 
provide a number of interesting facts about these extraordinary human beings: 

■ Not only do they live much longer than the rest of the world’s population, 
they also suffer from fewer chronic illnesses such as cancer and heart 
disease; inflammatory disorders are also less common. 

■ Many of these centenarians enjoy enviable levels of vitality and health that 
would be unthinkable for people of advanced age elsewhere. 

■ Their blood tests reveal fewer free radicals (which are responsible for 
cellular aging), as a result of drinking tea and eating until their stomachs are 
only 80 percent full. 

■ Women experience more moderate symptoms during menopause, and both 
men and women maintain higher levels of sexual hormones until much later 
in life. 

■ The rate of dementia is well below the global average. 


The Characters Behind Ikigai 

In Japanese, ikigai is written as zfecF EPH, combining zfecF, which means 
“life,” with ^§§, which means “to be worthwhile.” can be broken 
down into the characters ^, which means “armor,” “number one,” and “to 
be the first” (to head into battle, taking initiative as a leader), and §§, 
which means “beautiful” or “elegant.” 


Though we will consider each of these findings over the course of the book, 
research clearly indicates that the Okinawans’ focus on ikigai gives a sense of 
purpose to each and every day and plays an important role in their health and 
longevity. 


The five Blue Zones 

Okinawa holds first place among the world’s Blue Zones. In Okinawa, women in 
particular live longer and have fewer diseases than anywhere else in the world. 
The five regions identified and analyzed by Dan Buettner in his book The Blue 
Zones are: 

1. Okinawa, Japan (especially the northern part of the island). The locals eat a 
diet rich in vegetables and tofu typically served on small plates. In addition to 
their philosophy of ikigai , the moai, or close-knit group of friends (see page 
15), plays an important role in their longevity. 

2. Sardinia, Italy (specifically the provinces of Nuoro and Ogliastra). Locals on 
this island consume plenty of vegetables and one or two glasses of wine per 
day. As in Okinawa, the cohesive nature of this community is another factor 
directly related to longevity. 

3. Loma Linda, California. Researchers studied a group of Seventh-day 
Adventists who are among the longest-living people in the United States. 

4. The Nicoya Peninsula, Costa Rica. Locals remain remarkably active after 
ninety; many of the region’s older residents have no problem getting up at 
five thirty in the morning to work in the fields. 



5. Ikaria, Greece. One of every three inhabitants of this island near the coast of 
Turkey is over ninety years old (compared to less than 1 percent of the 
population of the United States), a fact that has earned it the nickname the 
Island of Long Life. The local secret seems to be a lifestyle that dates back to 
500 BC. 

In the following chapters, we will examine several factors that seem to be the 
keys to longevity and are found across the Blue Zones, paying special attention to 
Okinawa and its so-called Village of Longevity. First, however, it is worth 
pointing out that three of these regions are islands, where resources can be scarce 
and communities have to help one another. 

For many, helping others might be an ikigai strong enough to keep them alive. 

According to scientists who have studied the five Blue Zones, the keys to 
longevity are diet, exercise, finding a purpose in life (an ikigai), and forming 
strong social ties—that is, having a broad circle of friends and good family 
relations. 

Members of these communities manage their time well in order to reduce 
stress, consume little meat or processed foods, and drink alcohol in moderation.- 

They don’t do strenuous exercise, but they do move every day, taking walks 
and working in their vegetable gardens. People in the Blue Zones would rather 
walk than drive. Gardening, which involves daily low-intensity movement, is a 
practice almost all of them have in common. 


The 80 percent secret 

One of the most common sayings in Japan is “Hara hachi bu,” which is repeated 
before or after eating and means something like “Fill your belly to 80 percent.” 
Ancient wisdom advises against eating until we are full. This is why Okinawans 
stop eating when they feel their stomachs reach 80 percent of their capacity, 
rather than overeating and wearing down their bodies with long digestive 
processes that accelerate cellular oxidation. 

Of course, there is no way to know objectively if your stomach is at 80 
percent capacity. The lesson to leam from this saying is that we should stop eating 
when we are starting to feel full. The extra side dish, the snack we eat when we 
know in our hearts we don’t really need it, the apple pie after lunch—all these will 


give us pleasure in the short term, but not having them will make us happier in 
the long term. 

The way food is served is also important. By presenting their meals on many 
small plates, the Japanese tend to eat less. A typical meal in a restaurant in Japan 
is served in five plates on a tray, four of them very small and the main dish 
slightly bigger. Having five plates in front of you makes it seem like you are 
going to eat a lot, but what happens most of the time is that you end up feeling 
slightly hungry. This is one of the reasons why Westerners in Japan typically lose 
weight and stay trim. 

Recent studies by nutritionists reveal that Okinawans consume a daily average 
of 1,800 to 1,900 calories, compared to 2,200 to 3,300 in the United States, and 
have a body mass index between 18 and 22, compared to 26 or 27 in the United 
States. 

The Okinawan diet is rich in tofu, sweet potatoes, fish (three times per week), 
and vegetables (roughly 11 ounces per day). In the chapter dedicated to nutrition 
we will see which healthy, antioxidant-rich foods are included in this 80 percent. 


Moai: Connected for life 

It is customary in Okinawa to form close bonds within local communities. A moai 
is an informal group of people with common interests who look out for one 
another. For many, serving the community becomes part of their ikigai. 

The moai has its origins in hard times, when farmers would get together to 
share best practices and help one another cope with meager harvests. 

Members of a moai make a set monthly contribution to the group. This 
payment allows them to participate in meetings, dinners, games of go and shogi 
(Japanese chess), or whatever hobby they have in common. 

The funds collected by the group are used for activities, but if there is money 
left over, one member (decided on a rotating basis) receives a set amount from 
the surplus. In this way, being part of a moai helps maintain emotional and 
financial stability. If a member of a moai is in financial trouble, he or she can get 
an advance from the group’s savings. While the details of each moai ’s accounting 
practices vary according to the group and its economic means, the feeling of 
belonging and support gives the individual a sense of security and helps increase 
life expectancy. 


• • • 


Following this brief introduction to the topics covered in this book, we look at 
a few causes of premature aging in modern life, and then explore different 
factors related to ikigai. 



II 

ANTIAGING SECRETS 

Little things that add up to a long 
and happy life 



Aging’s escape velocity 

For more than a century, we’ve managed to add an average of 0.3 years to our life 
expectancy every year. But what would happen if we had the technology to add a 
year of life expectancy every year? In theory, we would achieve biological 
immortality, having reached aging’s “escape velocity.” 



you advance closer to the sign. When you reach the sign, you die. 

Now imagine a rabbit holding the sign and walking to the future. Every 
year that you live, the rabbit is half a year as far away. After a while, you 
will reach the rabbit and die. 

But what if the rabbit could walk at a pace of one year for every year 
of your life? You would never be able to catch the rabbit, and therefore 
you would never die. 

The speed at which the rabbit walks to the future is our technology. 

The more we advance technology and knowledge of our bodies, the faster 
we can make the rabbit walk. 

Aging’s escape velocity is the moment at which the rabbit walks at a 
pace of one year per year or faster, and we become immortal. 


Researchers with an eye to the future, such as Ray Kurzweil and Aubrey de 
Grey, claim that we’ll reach this escape velocity in a matter of decades. Other 
scientists are less optimistic, predicting that we’ll reach a limit, a maximum age 
we won’t be able to surpass, no matter how much technology we have. For 
example, some biologists assert that our cells stop regenerating after about 120 
years. 


Active mind, youthful body 



There is much wisdom in the classic saying “mens sana in corpore sano” (“a 
sound mind in a sound body”): It reminds us that both mind and body are 
important, and that the health of one is connected to that of the other. It has been 
shown that maintaining an active, adaptable mind is one of the key factors in 
staying young. 

Having a youthful mind also drives you toward a healthy lifestyle that will 
slow the aging process. 

Just as a lack of physical exercise has negative effects on our bodies and 
mood, a lack of mental exercise is bad for us because it causes our neurons and 
neural connections to deteriorate—and, as a result, reduces our ability to react to 
our surroundings. 

This is why it’s so important to give your brain a workout. 

One pioneer in advocating for mental exercise is the Israeli neuroscientist 
Shlomo Breznitz, who argues that the brain needs a lot of stimulation in order to 
stay in shape. As he stated in an interview with Eduard Punset for the Spanish 
television program Redes: 


There is a tension between what is good for someone and what they want to do. This is because people, 
especially older people, like to do things as they’ve always done them. The problem is that when the 
brain develops ingrained habits, it doesn’t need to think anymore. Things get done quickly and 
efficiently on automatic pilot, often in a very advantageous way. This creates a tendency to stick to 
routines, and the only way of breaking these is to confront the brain with new information.- 

Presented with new information, the brain creates new connections and is 
revitalized. This is why it is so important to expose yourself to change, even if 
stepping outside your comfort zone means feeling a bit of anxiety. 

The effects of mental training have been scientifically demonstrated. 
According to Collins Hemingway and Shlomo Breznitz in their book Maximum 
Brainpower: Challenging the Brain for Health and Wisdom, mental training is 
beneficial on many levels: “You begin exercising your brain by doing a certain 
task for the first time,” he writes. “And at first it seems very difficult, but as you 
leam how to do it, the training is already working. The second time, you realize 
that it’s easier, not harder, to do, because you’re getting better at it. This has a 
fantastic effect on a person’s mood. In and of itself, it is a transformation that 
affects not only the results obtained, but also his or her self-image.” 

This description of a “mental workout” might sound a bit formal, but simply 
interacting with others—playing a game, for example—offers new stimuli and 
helps prevent the depression that can come with solitude. 

Our neurons start to age while we are still in our twenties. This process is 


slowed, however, by intellectual activity, curiosity, and a desire to learn. Dealing 
with new situations, learning something new every day, playing games, and 
interacting with other people seem to be essential antiaging strategies for the 
mind. Furthermore, a more positive outlook in this regard will yield greater 
mental benefits. 


Stress: Accused of killing longevity 

Many people seem older than they are. Research into the causes of premature 
aging has shown that stress has a lot to do with it, because the body wears down 
much faster during periods of crisis. The American Institute of Stress 
investigated this degenerative process and concluded that most health problems 
are caused by stress. 

Researchers at the Heidelberg University Hospital conducted a study in which 
they subjected a young doctor to a job interview, which they made even more 
stressful by forcing him to solve complex math problems for thirty minutes. 
Afterward, they took a blood sample. What they discovered was that his 
antibodies had reacted to stress the same way they react to pathogens, activating 
the proteins that trigger an immune response. The problem is that this response 
not only neutralizes harmful agents, it also damages healthy cells, leading them to 
age prematurely. 

The University of California conducted a similar study, taking data and 
samples from thirty-nine women who had high levels of stress due to the illness 
of one of their children and comparing them to samples from women with 
healthy children and low levels of stress. They found that stress promotes cellular 
aging by weakening cell structures known as telomeres, which affect cellular 
regeneration and how our cells age. As the study revealed, the greater the stress, 
the greater the degenerative effect on cells. 


How does stress work? 

These days, people live at a frantic pace and in a nearly constant state of 
competition. At this fever pitch, stress is a natural response to the information 
being received by the body as potentially dangerous or problematic. 
Theoretically, this is a useful reaction, as it helps us survive in hostile 

cnrmnnrlinrrc Hlrzor A AAlirCA rvf r\nr m^r\1nfir\r&gt; 1a a x to* uca A tUic rAcn/vncA frv 


O Lil 1 KJ UlllU.llga. W V KsL L11V&gt;/ K/\JU±0^/ VJ1 UUI LVUIUllUil, VV HCi V LiOV^Va Lino 1 UOpUlWL/ IU 

deal with difficult situations and to flee from predators. 

The alarm that goes off in our head makes our neurons activate the pituitary 
gland, which produces hormones that release corticotropin, which in turn 
circulates through the body via the sympathetic nervous system. The adrenal 
gland is then triggered to release adrenaline and cortisol. Adrenaline raises our 
respiratory rate and pulse and prepares our muscles for action, getting the body 
ready to react to perceived danger, while cortisol increases the release of 
dopamine and blood glucose, which is what gets us “charged up” and allows us to 
face challenges. 


Cave Dwellers 

Modern Humans 

Were relaxed most of the time. 

Work most of the time and are alert to any and all threats. 

Felt stress only in very specific 
situations. 

Are online or waiting for notifications from their cell phones twenty-four hours a 
day. 

The threats were real: A predator could 
end their lives at any moment. 

The brain associates the ping of a cell phone or an e-mail notification with the 
threat of a predator. 

High doses of cortisol and adrenaline at 
moments of danger kept the body 
healthy. 

Low doses of cortisol flow constantly through the body, with implications for a 
range of health problems, including adrenal fatigue and chronic fatigue 
syndrome. 


These processes are, in moderation, beneficial—they help us overcome 
challenges in our daily lives. Nonetheless, the stress to which human beings are 
subjected today is clearly harmful. 

Stress has a degenerative effect over time. A sustained state of emergency 
affects the neurons associated with memory, as well as inhibiting the release of 
certain hormones, the absence of which can cause depression. Its secondary 
effects include irritability, insomnia, anxiety, and high blood pressure. 

As such, though challenges are good for keeping mind and body active, we 
should adjust our high-stress lifestyles in order to avoid the premature aging of 
our bodies. 


Be mindful about reducing stress 

Whether or not the threats we perceive are real, stress is an easily identifiable 
condition that not only causes anxiety but is also highly psychosomatic, affecting 
everything from our digestive system to our skin. 






This is why prevention is so important in avoiding the toll that stress takes on 
us—and why many experts recommend practicing mindfulness. 

The central premise of this stress-reduction method is focusing on the self: 
noticing our responses, even if they are conditioned by habit, in order to be fully 
conscious of them. In this way, we connect with the here and now and limit 
thoughts that tend to spiral out of control. 

“We have to leam to turn off the autopilot that’s steering us in an endless loop. 
We all know people who snack while talking on the phone or watching the news. 
You ask them if the omelet they just ate had onion in it, and they can’t tell you,” 
says Roberto Alcibar, who abandoned his fast-paced life to become a certified 
instructor of mindfulness after an illness threw him into a period of acute stress. 

One way to reach a state of mindfulness is through meditation, which helps 
filter the information that reaches us from the outside world. It can also be 
achieved through breathing exercises, yoga, and body scans. 

Achieving mindfulness involves a gradual process of training, but with a bit of 
practice we can learn to focus our mind completely, which reduces stress and 
helps us live longer. 


A little stress is good for you 

While sustained, intense stress is a known enemy of longevity and both mental 
and physical health, low levels of stress have been shown to be beneficial. 

After observing a group of test subjects for more than twenty years, Dr. 
Howard S. Friedman, a psychology professor at the University of California, 
Riverside, discovered that people who maintained a low level of stress, who faced 
challenges and put their heart and soul into their work in order to succeed, lived 
longer than those who chose a more relaxed lifestyle and retired earlier. From 
this, he concluded that a small dose of stress is a positive thing, as those who live 
with low levels of stress tend to develop healthier habits, smoke less, and drink 
less alcohol.- 

Given this, it is not surprising that many of the supercentenarians—people 
who live to be 110 or more—whom we’ll meet in this book talk about having 
lived intense lives and working well into old age. 


A lot of sitting will age you 


In the Western world in particular, the rise in sedentary behavior has led to 
numerous diseases such as hypertension and obesity, which in turn affect 
longevity. 

Spending too much time seated at work or at home not only reduces muscular 
and respiratory fitness but also increases appetite and curbs the desire to 
participate in activities. Being sedentary can lead to hypertension, imbalanced 
eating, cardiovascular disease, osteoporosis, and even certain kinds of cancer. 
Recent studies have shown a connection between a lack of physical activity and 
the progressive distortion of telomeres in the immune system, which ages those 
cells and, in turn, the organism as a whole. 

This is a problem at all life stages, not only among adults. Sedentary children 
suffer from high rates of obesity and all its associated health issues and risks, 
which is why it’s so important to develop a healthy and active lifestyle at an early 
age. 

It’s easy to be less sedentary; it just takes a bit of effort and a few changes to 
your routine. We can access a more active lifestyle that makes us feel better 
inside and out—we just have to add a few ingredients to our everyday habits: 

■ Walk to work, or just go on a walk for at least twenty minutes each day. 

■ Use your feet instead of an elevator or escalator. This is good for your 
posture, your muscles, and your respiratory system, among other things. 

■ Participate in social or leisure activities so that you don’t spend too much time 
in front of the television. 

■ Replace your junk food with fruit and you’ll have less of an urge to snack, 
and more nutrients in your system. 

■ Get the right amount of sleep. Seven to nine hours is good, but any more than 
that makes us lethargic. 

■ Play with children or pets, or join a sports team. This not only strengthens the 
body but also stimulates the mind and boosts self-esteem. 

■ Be conscious of your daily routine in order to detect harmful habits and 
replace them with more positive ones. 

By making these small changes, we can begin to renew our bodies and minds 
and increase our life expectancy. 


A mArlnlV Knt'f I/nnf 


n muuci a utai'ivcjji acuci 

Though we age both externally and internally, both physically and mentally, one 
of the things that tell us the most about people’s age is their skin, which takes on 
different textures and colors according to processes going on beneath the surface. 
Most of those who make their living as models claim to sleep between nine and 
ten hours the night before a fashion show. This gives their skin a taut, wrinkle- 
free appearance and a healthy, radiant glow. 

Science has shown that sleep is a key antiaging tool, because when we sleep 
we generate melatonin, a hormone that occurs naturally in our bodies. The pineal 
gland produces it from the neurotransmitter serotonin according to our diurnal 
and nocturnal rhythms, and it plays a role in our sleep and waking cycles. 

A powerful antioxidant, melatonin helps us live longer, and also offers the 
following benefits: 

■ It strengthens the immune system. 

■ It contains an element that protects against cancer. 

■ It promotes the natural production of insulin. 

■ It slows the onset of Alzheimer’s disease. 

■ It helps prevent osteoporosis and fight heart disease. 

For all these reasons, melatonin is a great ally in preserving youth. It should be 
noted, however, that melatonin production decreases after age thirty. We can 
compensate for this by: 

■ Eating a balanced diet and getting more calcium. 

■ Soaking up a moderate amount of sun each day. 

■ Getting enough sleep. 

■ Avoiding stress, alcohol, tobacco, and caffeine, all of which make it harder 
to get a good night’s rest, depriving us of the melatonin we need. 

Experts are trying to determine whether artificially stimulating production of 
melatonin might help slow the aging process . . . which would confirm the theory 
that we already carry the secret to longevity within us. 


Antiaging attitudes 


The mind has tremendous power over the body and how quickly it ages. Most 
doctors agree that the secret to keeping the body young is keeping the mind active 
—a key element of ikigai —and in not caving in when we face difficulties 
throughout our lives. 

One study, conducted at Yeshiva University, found that the people who live 
the longest have two dispositional traits in common: a positive attitude and a high 
degree of emotional awareness. In other words, those who face challenges with a 
positive outlook and are able to manage their emotions are already well on their 
way toward longevity. 

A stoic attitude —serenity in the face of a setback—can also help keep you 
young, as it lowers anxiety and stress levels and stabilizes behavior. This can be 
seen in the greater life expectancies of certain cultures with unhurried, deliberate 
lifestyles. 

Many centenarians and supercentenarians have similar profiles: They have had 
full lives that were difficult at times, but they knew how to approach these 
challenges with a positive attitude and not be overwhelmed by the obstacles they 
faced. 

Alexander Imich, who in 2014 became the world’s oldest living man at age 
111, knew he had good genes but understood that other factors contributed, too: 
“The life you live is equally or more important for longevity,” he said in an 
interview with Reuters after being added to Guinness World Records in 2014. 


An ode to longevity 

During our stay in Ogimi, the village that holds the Guinness record for longevity, 
a woman who was about to turn 100 years old sang the following song for us in a 
mixture of Japanese and the local dialect: 

To keep healthy and have a long life, 

eat just a little of everything with relish, 

go to bed early, get up early, and then go out for a walk. 

We live each day with serenity and we enjoy the journey. 

To keep healthy and have a long life, 
we get on well with all of our friends. 

Spring, summer, fall, winter, 
we happily enjoy all the seasons. 


me secrei is 10 noi gei aisiraciea Dy now oia me lingers are; 
from the fingers to the head and back once again. 

If you keep moving with your fingers working, 100 years 
will come to you.* 


We can now use our fingers to turn the page to the next chapter, where we will 
look at the close relationship between longevity and discovering our life’s 
mission. 


FROM LOGOTHERAPY TO IKIGAI 

How to live longer and better by 
finding your purpose 



What is logotherapy? 

A colleague once asked Viktor Frankl to define his school of psychology in a 
single phrase, to which Frankl replied, “Well, in logotherapy the patient sits up 
straight and has to listen to things that are, on occasion, hard to hear.” The 
colleague had just described psychoanalysis to him in the following terms: “In 
psychoanalysis, the patient lies down on a couch and tells you things that are, on 
occasion, hard to say.” 

Frankl explains that one of the first questions he would ask his patients was 
“Why do you not commit suicide?” Usually the patient found good reasons not to, 
and was able to carry on. What, then, does logotherapy do? - 

The answer is pretty clear: It helps you find reasons to live. 

Logotherapy pushes patients to consciously discover their life’s purpose in 
order to confront their neuroses. Their quest to fulfill their destiny then motivates 
them to press forward, breaking the mental chains of the past and overcoming 
whatever obstacles they encounter along the way. 


Something to Live For 

A study conducted by Frankl in his Vienna clinic found that among both 
patients and personnel, around 80 percent believed that human beings 
needed a reason for living, and around 60 percent felt they had someone 
or something in their lives worth dying for- 


The search for meaning 

The search for purpose became a personal, driving force that allowed Frankl to 
achieve his goals. The process of logotherapy can be summarized in these five 
steps: 



1. A person feels empty, frustrated, or anxious. 

2. The therapist shows him that what he is feeling is the desire to have a 
meaningful life. 

3. The patient discovers his life’s purpose (at that particular point in time). 

4. Of his own free will, the patient decides to accept or reject that destiny. 

5. This newfound passion for life helps him overcome obstacles and sorrows. 

Frankl himself would live and die for his principles and ideals. His 
experiences as a prisoner at Auschwitz showed him that “Everything can be taken 
from a man but one thing: the last of the human freedoms—to choose one’s 
attitude in any given set of circumstances, to choose one’s own way.”- It was 
something he had to go through alone, without any help, and it inspired him for 
the rest of his life. 


Ten Differences Between Psychoanalysis and Logotherapy 

Psychoanalysis 

Logotherapy 

The patient reclines on a couch, like a patient. 

The patient sits facing the therapist, who guides him or her without 
passing judgment. 

Is retrospective: It looks to the past. 

Looks toward the future. 

Is introspective: It analyzes neuroses. 

Does not delve into the patient’s neuroses. 

The drive is toward pleasure. 

The drive is toward purpose and meaning. 

Centers on psychology. 

Includes a spiritual dimension. 

Works on psychogenic neuroses. 

Also works on noogenic, or existential, neuroses. 

Analyzes the unconscious origin of conflicts 
(instinctual dimension). 

Deals with conflicts when and where they arise (spiritual 
dimension). 

Limits itself to the patient’s instincts. 

Also deals with spiritual realities. 

Is fundamentally incompatible with faith. 

Is compatible with faith. 

Seeks to reconcile conflicts and satisfy impulses and 
instincts. 

Seeks to help the patient find meaning in his life and satisfy his 
moral principles. 


Fight for yourself 

Existential frustration arises when our life is without purpose, or when that 
purpose is skewed. In Frankl’s view, however, there is no need to see this 
frustration as an anomaly or a symptom of neurosis; instead, it can be a positive 




thing—a catalyst tor change. 

Logotherapy does not see this frustration as mental illness, the way other forms 
of therapy do, but rather as spiritual anguish —a natural and beneficial 
phenomenon that drives those who suffer from it to seek a cure, whether on their 
own or with the help of others, and in so doing to find greater satisfaction in life. 
It helps them change their own destiny. 

Logotherapy enters the picture if the person needs help doing this, if he needs 
guidance in discovering his life’s purpose and later in overcoming conflicts so he 
can keep moving toward his objective. In Man’s Search for Meaning, Frankl cites 
one of Nietzsche’s famous aphorisms: “He who has a why to live for can bear 
with almost any how.” 

Based on his own experience, Frankl believed that our health depends on that 
natural tension that comes from comparing what we’ve accomplished so far with 
what we’d like to achieve in the future. What we need, then, is not a peaceful 
existence, but a challenge we can strive to meet by applying all the skills at our 
disposal. 

Existential crisis, on the other hand, is typical of modern societies in which 
people do what they are told to do, or what others do, rather than what they want 
to do. They often try to fill the gap between what is expected of them and what 
they want for themselves with economic power or physical pleasure, or by 
numbing their senses. It can even lead to suicide. 

Sunday neurosis, for example, is what happens when, without the obligations 
and commitments of the workweek, the individual realizes how empty he is 
inside. He has to find a solution. Above all, he has to find his purpose, his reason 
for getting out of bed—his ikigai. 


“I Feel Empty Inside” 

In a study conducted at the Vienna Polyclinic Hospital, Frankl’s team 
found that 55 percent of the patients they interviewed were experiencing 
some degree of existential crisis.- 


According to logotherapy, discovering one’s purpose in life helps an individual 
fill that existential void. Frankl, a man who faced his problems and turned his 
objectives into actions, could look back on his life in peace as he grew old. He 



did not have to envy those still enjoying their youth, because he had amassed a 
broad set of experiences that showed he had lived for something. 


Better living through logotherapy: A few key ideas 

■ We don’t create the meaning of our life, as Sartre claimed—we discover it. 

■ We each have a unique reason for being, which can be adjusted or 
transformed many times over the years. 

■ Just as worry often brings about precisely the thing that was feared, 
excessive attention to a desire (or “hyper-intention”) can keep that desire 
from being fulfilled. 

■ Humor can help break negative cycles and reduce anxiety. 

■ We all have the capacity to do noble or terrible things. The side of the 
equation we end up on depends on our decisions, not on the condition in 
which we find ourselves. 

In the pages that follow, we will look at four cases from Frankl’s own practice 
in order to better understand the search for meaning and purpose. 


Case study: Viktor Frankl 

In German concentration camps, as in those that would later be built in Japan and 
Korea, psychiatrists confirmed that the prisoners with the greatest chance of 
survival were those who had things they wanted to accomplish outside the camp, 
those who felt a strong need to get out of there alive. This was true of Frankl, 
who, after being released and successfully developing the school of logotherapy, 
realized he had been the first patient of his own practice. 

Frankl had a goal to achieve, and it made him persevere. He arrived at 
Auschwitz carrying a manuscript that contained all the theories and research he 
had compiled over the course of his career, ready for publication. When it was 
confiscated, he felt compelled to write it all over again, and that need drove him 
and gave his life meaning amid the constant horror and doubt of the 
concentration camp—so much so that over the years, and especially when he fell 
ill with typhus, he would jot down fragments and key words from the lost work 
on any scrap of paper he found. 


Case study: The American diplomat 

An important North American diplomat went to Frankl to pick up where he left 
off with a course of treatment he had started five years earlier in the United 
States. When Frankl asked him why he’d started therapy in the first place, the 
diplomat answered that he hated his job and his country’s international policies, 
which he had to follow and enforce. His American psychoanalyst, whom he’d 
been seeing for years, insisted he make peace with his father so that his 
government and his job, both representations of the paternal figure, would seem 
less disagreeable. Frankl, however, showed him in just a few sessions that his 
frustration was due to the fact that he wanted to pursue a different career, and the 
diplomat concluded his treatment with that idea in mind. 

Five years later, the former diplomat informed Frankl that he had been 
working during that time in a different profession, and that he was happy. 

In Frankl’s view, the man not only didn’t need all those years of 
psychoanalysis, he also couldn’t even really be considered a “patient” in need of 
therapy. He was simply someone in search of a new life’s purpose; as soon as he 
found it, his life took on deeper meaning. 


Case study: The suicidal mother 

The mother of a boy who had died at age eleven was admitted to Frankl’s clinic 
after she tried to kill herself and her other son. It was this other son, paralyzed 
since birth, who kept her from carrying out her plan: He did believe his life had a 
purpose, and if his mother killed them both, it would keep him from achieving 
his goals. 

The woman shared her story in a group session. To help her, Frankl asked 
another woman to imagine a hypothetical situation in which she lay on her 
deathbed, old and wealthy but childless. The woman insisted that, in that case, she 
would have felt her life had been a failure. 

When the suicidal mother was asked to perform the same exercise, imagining 
herself on her deathbed, she looked back and realized that she had done 
everything in her power for her children—for both of them. She had given her 
paralyzed son a good life, and he had turned into a kind, reasonably happy person. 
To this she added, crying, “As for myself, I can look back peacefully on my life; 
for I can say my life was full of meaning, and I have tried hard to live it fully; I 
have done mv best—I have done mv best for mv son. Mv life was no failure!” 


In this way, by imagining herself on her deathbed and looking back, the 
suicidal mother found the meaning that, though she was not aware of it, her life 
already had. 


Case study: The grief-stricken doctor 

An elderly doctor, unable to overcome the deep depression into which he’d fallen 
after the death of his wife two years earlier, went to Frankl for help. 

Instead of giving him advice or analyzing his condition, Frankl asked him 
what would have happened if he had been the one who died first. The doctor, 
horrified, answered that it would have been terrible for his poor wife, that she 
would have suffered tremendously. To which Frankl responded, “You see, 
doctor? You have spared her all that suffering, but the price you have to pay for 
this is to survive, and mourn her.” 

The doctor didn’t say another word. He left Frankl’s office in peace, after 
taking the therapist’s hand in his own. He was able to tolerate the pain in place of 
his beloved wife. His life had been given a purpose. 


Morita therapy 

In the same decade that logotherapy came into being—a few years earlier, in fact 
—Shoma Morita created his own purpose-centered therapy, in Japan. It proved to 
be effective in the treatment of neurosis, obsessive-compulsive disorder, and 
posttraumatic stress. 

In addition to being a psychotherapist, Shoma Morita was a Zen Buddhist, and 
his therapy left a lasting spiritual mark on Japan. 

Many Western forms of therapy focus on controlling or modifying the 
patient’s emotions. In the West, we tend to believe that what we think influences 
how we feel, which in turn influences how we act. In contrast, Morita therapy 
focuses on teaching patients to accept their emotions without trying to control them , 
since their feelings will change as a result of their actions. 

In addition to accepting the patient’s emotions, Morita therapy seeks to 
“create” new emotions on the basis of actions. According to Morita, these 
emotions are learned through experience and repetition. 


Morita therapy is not meant to eliminate symptoms; instead it teaches us to 
accept our desires, anxieties, fears, and worries, and let them go. As Morita 
writes in his book Morita Therapy and the True Nature of Anxiety-Based 
Disorders, “In feelings, it is best to be wealthy and generous.” 

Morita explained the idea of letting go of negative feelings with the following 
fable: A donkey that is tied to a post by a rope will keep walking around the post 
in an attempt to free itself, only to become more immobilized and attached to the 
post. The same thing applies to people with obsessive thinking who become more 
trapped in their own suffering when they try to escape from their fears and 
discomfort.- 

The basic principles of Morita therapy 

1. Accept your feelings. If we have obsessive thoughts, we should not try to 
control them or get rid of them. If we do, they become more intense. Regarding 
human emotions, the Zen master would say, “If we try to get rid of one wave with 
another, we end up with an infinite sea.” We don’t create our feelings; they 
simply come to us, and we have to accept them. The trick is welcoming them. 
Morita likened emotions to the weather: We can’t predict or control them; we can 
only observe them. To this point, he often quoted the Vietnamese monk Thich 
Nhat Hanh, who would say, “Hello, solitude. How are you today? Come, sit with 
me, and I will care for you.”- 

2. Do what you should be doing. We shouldn’t focus on eliminating symptoms, 
because recovery will come on its own. We should focus instead on the present 
moment, and if we are suffering, on accepting that suffering. Above all, we 
should avoid intellectualizing the situation. The therapist’s mission is to develop 
the patient’s character so he or she can face any situation, and character is 
grounded in the things we do. Morita therapy does not offer its patients 
explanations, but rather allows them to learn from their actions and activities. It 
doesn’t tell you how to meditate, or how to keep a diary the way Western 
therapies do. It is up to the patient to make discoveries through experience. 

3. Discover your life’s purpose. We can’t control our emotions, but we can take 
charge of our actions every day. This is why we should have a clear sense of our 
purpose, and always keep Morita’s mantra in mind: “What do we need to be doing 
right now? What action should we be taking?” The key to achieving this is having 
dared to look inside yourself to find your ikigai. 


The four phases of Morita therapy 

Morita’s original treatment, which lasts fifteen to twenty-one days, consists of the 
following stages: 

1. Isolation and rest (five to seven days). During the first week of treatment, 
the patient rests in a room without any external stimuli. No television, books, 
family, friends, or speaking. All the patient has is his thoughts. He lies down for 
most of the day and is visited regularly by the therapist, who tries to avoid 
interacting with him as much as possible. The therapist simply advises the patient 
to continue observing the rise and fall of his emotions as he lies there. When the 
patient gets bored and wants to start doing things again, he is ready to move on to 
the next stage of therapy. 

2. Light occupational therapy (five to seven days). In this stage, the patient 
performs repetitive tasks in silence. One of these is keeping a diary about his 
thoughts and feelings. The patient goes outside after a week of being shut in, 
takes walks in nature, and does breathing exercises. He also starts doing simple 
activities, such as gardening, drawing, or painting. During this stage, the patient is 
still not allowed to talk to anyone, except the therapist. 

3. Occupational therapy (five to seven days). In this stage, the patient performs 
tasks that require physical movement. Dr. Morita liked to take his patients to the 
mountains to chop wood. In addition to physical tasks, the patient is also 
immersed in other activities, such as writing, painting, or making ceramics. The 
patient can speak with others at this stage, but only about the tasks at hand. 

4. The return to social life and the “real” world. The patient leaves the hospital 
and is reintroduced to social life, but maintains the practices of meditation and 
occupational therapy developed during treatment. The idea is to reenter society as 
a new person, with a sense of purpose, and without being controlled by social or 
emotional pressures. 


Naikan meditation 

Morita was a great Zen master of Naikan introspective meditation. Much of his 
therapy draws on his knowledge and mastery of this school, which centers on 
three questions the individual must ask him-or herself: 


1. What have I received from person X? 

2. What have I given to person X? 

3. What problems have I caused person X? 

Through these reflections, we stop identifying others as the cause of our 
problems and deepen our own sense of responsibility. As Morita said, “If you are 
angry and want to fight, think about it for three days before coming to blows. 
After three days, the intense desire to fight will pass on its own.”- 


And now, ikigai 

Logotherapy and Morita therapy are both grounded in a personal, unique 
experience that you can access without therapists or spiritual retreats: the mission 
of finding your ikigai, your existential fuel. Once you find it, it is only a matter of 
having the courage and making the effort to stay on the right path. 

In the following chapters, we’ll take a look at the basic tools you’ll need to get 
moving along that path: finding flow in the tasks you’ve chosen to do, eating in a 
balanced and mindful way, doing low-intensity exercise, and learning not to give 
in when difficulties arise. In order to do this, you have to accept that the world— 
like the people who live in it—is imperfect, but that it is still full of opportunities 
for growth and achievement. 

Are you ready to throw yourself into your passion as if it were the most 
important thing in the world? 



FIND FLOW IN EVERYTHING YOU DO 

How to turn work and free time 
into spaces for growth 



We are what we repeatedly do. 

Excellence, then, is not an act but a habit. 

—Aristotle 


Going with the flow 

Imagine you are skiing down one of your favorite slopes. Powdery snow flies up 
on both sides of you like white sand. Conditions are perfect. 

You are entirely focused on skiing as well as you can. You know exactly how 
to move at each moment. There is no future, no past. There is only the present. 

You feel the snow, your skis, your body, and your consciousness united as a 
single entity. You are completely immersed in the experience, not thinking about or 
distracted by anything else. Your ego dissolves, and you become part of what you 
are doing. 

This is the kind of experience Bruce Lee described with his famous “Be water, 
my friend.” 

We’ve all felt our sense of time vanish when we lose ourselves in an activity 
we enjoy. We start cooking and before we know it, several hours have passed. 

We spend an afternoon with a book and forget about the world going by until we 
notice the sunset and realize we haven’t eaten dinner. We go surfing and don’t 
realize how many hours we have spent in the water until the next day, when our 
muscles ache. 

The opposite can also happen. When we have to complete a task we don’t want 
to do, every minute feels like a lifetime and we can’t stop looking at our watch. 

As the quip attributed to Einstein goes, “Put your hand on a hot stove for a 
minute and it seems like an hour. Sit with a pretty girl for an hour, and it seems 
like a minute. That is relativity.” 

The funny thing is that someone else might really enjoy the same task, but we 
want to finish as quickly as possible. 

What makes us enjoy doing something so much that we forget about whatever 
worries we might have while we do it? When are we happiest? These questions 
can help us discover our ikigai. 


The power of flow 

These questions are also at the heart of psychologist Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi’s 
research into the experience of being completely immersed in what we are doing. 
Csikszentmihalyi called this state “flow,” and described it as the pleasure, delight, 
creativity, and process when we are completely immersed in life. 

There is no magic recipe for finding happiness, for living according to your 
ikigai, but one key ingredient is the ability to reach this state of flow and, through 
this state, to have an “optimal experience.” 

In order to achieve this optimal experience, we have to focus on increasing the 
time we spend on activities that bring us to this state of flow, rather than allowing 
ourselves to get caught up in activities that offer immediate pleasure—like eating 
too much, abusing drugs or alcohol, or stuffing ourselves with chocolate in front 
of the TV. 

As Csikszentmihalyi asserts in his book Flow: The Psychology of Optimal 
Experience, flow is “the state in which people are so involved in an activity that 
nothing else seems to matter; the experience itself is so enjoyable that people will 
do it even at great cost, for the sheer sake of doing it.” 

It is not only creative professionals who require the high doses of 
concentration that promote flow. Most athletes, chess players, and engineers also 
spend much of their time on activities that bring them to this state. 

According to Csikszentmihalyi’s research, a chess player feels the same way 
upon entering a state of flow as a mathematician working on a formula or a 
surgeon performing an operation. A professor of psychology, Csikszentmihalyi 
analyzed data from people around the world and discovered that flow is the same 
among individuals of all ages and cultures. In New York and Okinawa, we all 
reach a state of flow in the same way. 

But what happens to our mind when we are in that state? 

When we flow, we are focused on a concrete task without any distractions. 

Our mind is “in order.” The opposite occurs when we try to do something while 
our mind is on other things. 

If you often find yourself losing focus while working on something you 
consider important, there are several strategies you can employ to increase your 
chances of achieving flow. 


The Seven Conditions for Achieving Flow 


A 


r«- 4-y-v -*»/-», 


I/-»I&gt; /-»C /-«I&gt; /~V-P I I J /--» ! « 1 T T 1 


I 1 4-t t 4 - 1 % /"* 


/^uuuiumg iu icf&gt;caiuiici uwcii ouiicuici ui L/craui umveisiiy, me 

requirements for achieving flow are: 

1. Knowing what to do 

2. Knowing how to do it 

3. Knowing how well you are doing 

4. Knowing where to go (where navigation is involved) 

5. Perceiving significant challenges 

6. Perceiving significant skills 

7. Being free from distractions- 


Strategy 1: Choose a difficult task (but not too 
difficult!) 

Schaffer’s model encourages us to take on tasks that we have a chance of 
completing but that are slightly outside our comfort zone. 

Every task, sport, or job has a set of rules, and we need a set of skills to follow 
them. If the rules for completing a task or achieving a purpose are too basic 
relative to our skill set, we will likely get bored. Activities that are too easy lead 
to apathy. 

If, on the other hand, we assign ourselves a task that is too difficult, we won’t 
have the skills to complete it and will almost certainly give up—and feel 
frustrated, to boot. 

The ideal is to find a middle path, something aligned with our abilities but just 
a bit of a stretch, so we experience it as a challenge. This is what Ernest 
Hemingway meant when he said, “Sometimes I write better than I can.’ - 

We want to see challenges through to the end because we enjoy the feeling of 
pushing ourselves. Bertrand Russell expressed a similar idea when he said, “To be 
able to concentrate for a considerable amount of time is essential to difficult 
achievement.”- 

If you’re a graphic designer, learn a new software program for your next 
project. If you’re a programmer, use a new programming language. If you’re a 
dancer, try to incorporate into your next routine a movement that has seemed 
impossible for years. 

Add a little something extra, something that takes you out of your comfort 



zone. 


Even doing something as simple as reading means following certain rules, 
having certain abilities and knowledge. If we set out to read a book on quantum 
mechanics for specialists in physics without being specialists in physics ourselves, 
we’ll probably give up after a few minutes. On the other end of the spectrum, if 
we already know everything a book has to tell us, we’ll get bored right away. 

However, if the book is appropriate to our knowledge and abilities, and builds 
on what we already know, we’ll immerse ourselves in our reading, and time will 
flow. This pleasure and satisfaction are evidence that we are in tune with our 
ikigai. 


Easy 

Challenging 

Beyond Our Abilities 

Boredom 

Flow 

Anxiety 


Strategy 2: Have a clear, concrete objective 

Video games—played in moderation—board games, and sports are great ways to 
achieve flow, because the objective tends to be very clear: Beat your rival or your 
own record while following a set of explicitly defined rules. 

Unfortunately, the objective isn’t quite as clear in most situations. 

According to a study by Boston Consulting Group, when asked about their 
bosses, the number one complaint of employees at multinational corporations is 
that they don’t “communicate the team’s mission clearly,” and that, as a result, the 
employees don’t know what their objectives are. 

What often happens, especially in big companies, is that the executives get lost 
in the details of obsessive planning, creating strategies to hide the fact that they 
don’t have a clear objective. It’s like heading out to sea with a map but no 
destination. 

It is much more important to have a compass pointing to a concrete objective 
than to have a map. Joi Ito, director of the MIT Media Lab, encourages us to use 
the principle of “compass over maps” as a tool to navigate our world of 
uncertainty. In the book Whiplash: How to Survive Our Faster Future , he and Jeff 
Howe write, “In an increasingly unpredictable world moving ever more quickly, a 
detailed map may lead you deep into the woods at an unnecessarily high cost. A 
good compass, though, will always take you where you need to go. It doesn’t 
mean that you should start your journey without any idea where you’re going. 








What it does mean is understanding that while the path to your goal may not be 
straight, you’ll finish faster and more efficiently than you would have if you had 
trudged along a preplanned route.” 

In business, the creative professions, and education alike, it’s important to 
reflect on what we hope to achieve before starting to work, study, or make 
something. We should ask ourselves questions such as: 

■ What is my objective for today’s session in the studio? 

■ How many words am I going to write today for the article coming out next 
month? 

■ What is my team’s mission? 

■ How fast will I set the metronome tomorrow in order to play that sonata at 
an allegro tempo by the end of the week? 

Having a clear objective is important in achieving flow, but we also have to 
know how to leave it behind when we get down to business. Once the journey has 
begun, we should keep this objective in mind without obsessing over it. 

When Olympic athletes compete for a gold medal, they can’t stop to think how 
pretty the medal is. They have to be present in the moment—they have t o flow. If 
they lose focus for a second, thinking how proud they’ll be to show the medal to 
their parents, they’ll almost certainly commit an error at a critical moment and 
will not win the competition. 

One common example of this is writer’s block. Imagine that a writer has to 
finish a novel in three months. The objective is clear; the problem is that the 
writer can’t stop obsessing over it. Every day she wakes up thinking, “I have to 
write that novel,” and every day she sets about reading the newspaper and 
cleaning the house. Every evening she feels frustrated and promises she’ll get to 
work the next day. 

Days, weeks, and months pass, and the writer still hasn’t gotten anything down 
on the page, when all it would have taken was to sit down and get that first word 
out, then the second ... to flow with the project, expressing her ikigai. 

As soon as you take these first small steps, your anxiety will disappear and you 
will achieve a pleasant flow in the activity you’re doing. Getting back to Albert 
Einstein, “a happy man is too satisfied with the present to dwell on the future.”- 


Vague Objective 

Clearly Defined Objective and a 
Focus on Process 

Obsessive Desire to Achieve a Goal 

While Ignoring Process 

r ■ j , 


. _ _ a . , 








cmm usion, Lime auu energy wasieu uii 
meaningless tasks 

Flow 

rixauon uii me oujecuve lamer man gening 

down to business 

Mental block 

Flow 

Mental block 



Strategy 3: Concentrate on a single task 

This is perhaps one of the greatest obstacles we face today, with so much 
technology and so many distractions. We’re listening to a video on YouTube 
while writing an e-mail, when suddenly a chat prompt pops up and we answer it. 
Then our smartphone vibrates in our pocket; just as soon as we respond to that 
message, we’re back at our computer, logging on to Facebook. 

Pretty soon thirty minutes have passed, and we’ve forgotten what the e-mail 
we were writing was supposed to be about. 

This also happens sometimes when we put on a movie with dinner and don’t 
realize how delicious the salmon was until we’re taking the last bite. 

We often think that combining tasks will save us time, but scientific evidence 
shows that it has the opposite effect. Even those who claim to be good at 
multitasking are not very productive. In fact, they are some of the least 
productive people. 

Our brains can take in millions of bits of information but can only actually 
process a few dozen per second. When we say we’re multitasking, what we’re 
really doing is switching back and forth between tasks very quickly. 
Unfortunately, we’re not computers adept at parallel processing. We end up 
spending all our energy alternating between tasks, instead of focusing on doing 
one of them well. 

Concentrating on one thing at a time may be the single most important factor in 
achieving flow. 

According to Csikszentmihalyi, in order to focus on a task we need: 

1. To be in a distraction-free environment 

2. To have control over what we are doing at every moment 

Technology is great, if we’re in control of it. It’s not so great if it takes control 
of us. For example, if you have to write a research paper, you might sit down at 
your computer and use Google to look up the information you need. However, if 
you’re not very disciplined, you might end up surfing the Web instead of writing 
that naner. In that case. Google and the Internet will have taken over, nulling vou 



CP J 


out of your state of flow. 

It has been scientifically shown that if we continually ask our brains to switch 
back and forth between tasks, we waste time, make more mistakes, and 
remember less of what we’ve done. 

Several studies conducted at Stanford University by Clifford Ivar Nass 
describe our generation as suffering from an epidemic of multitasking. One such 
study analyzed the behavior of hundreds of students, dividing them into groups 
based on the number of things they tended to do at once. The students who were 
the most addicted to multitasking typically alternated among more than four 
tasks; for example, taking notes while reading a textbook, listening to a podcast, 
answering messages on their smartphone, and sometimes checking their Twitter 
timeline. 

Each group of students was shown a screen with several red and several blue 
arrows. The objective of the exercise was to count the red arrows. 

At first, all the students answered correctly right away, without much trouble. 
As the number of blue arrows increased (the number of red arrows stayed the 
same; only their position changed), however, the students accustomed to 
multitasking had serious trouble counting the red arrows in the time allotted, or as 
quickly as the students who did not habitually multitask, for one very simple 
reason: They got distracted by the blue arrows! Their brains were trained to pay 
attention to every stimulus, regardless of its importance, while the brains of the 
other students were trained to focus on a single task—in this case, counting the 
red arrows and ignoring the blue ones.- 

Other studies indicate that working on several things at once lowers our 
productivity by at least 60 percent and our IQ by more than ten points. 

One study funded by the Swedish Council for Working Life and Social 
Research found that a sample group of more than four thousand young adults 
between the ages of twenty and twenty-four who were addicted to their 
smartphones got less sleep, felt less connected to their community at school, and 
were more likely to show signs of depression.- 


Concentrating on a Single Task 

Multitasking 

Makes achieving flow more likely 

Makes achieving flow impossible 

Increases productivity 

Decreases productivity by 60 percent (though it doesn’t seem to) 

Increases our power of retention 

Makes it harder to remember things 

Makes us less likely to make mistakes 

Makes us more likely to make mistakes 








Helps us feel calm and in control of the task at 
hand 

Makes us feel stressed by the sensation that we’re losing control, that our 
tasks are controlling us 

Causes us to become more considerate as we 
pay full attention to those around us 

Causes us to hurt those around us through our “addiction” to stimuli: 
always checking our phones, always on social media . . . 

Increases creativity 

Reduces creativity 


What can we do to avoid falling victim to this flow-impeding epidemic? How 
can we train our brains to focus on a single task? Here are a few ideas for 
creating a space and time free of distractions, to increase our chances of reaching 
a state of flow and thereby getting in touch with our ikigai: 

■ Don’t look at any kind of screen for the first hour you’re awake and the last 
hour before you go to sleep. 

■ Turn off your phone before you achieve flow. There is nothing more 
important than the task you have chosen to do during this time. If this seems 
too extreme, enable the “do not disturb” function so only the people closest 
to you can contact you in case of emergency. 

■ Designate one day of the week, perhaps a Saturday or Sunday, a day of 
technological “fasting,” making exceptions only for e-readers (without Wi¬ 
Fi) or MP3 players. 

■ Go to a cafe that doesn’t have Wi-Fi. 

■ Read and respond to e-mail only once or twice per day. Define those times 
clearly and stick to them. 

■ Try the Pomodoro Technique: Get yourself a kitchen timer (some are made 
to look like a pomodoro, or tomato) and commit to working on a single task 
as long as it’s running. The Pomodoro Technique recommends 25 minutes of 
work and 5 minutes of rest for each cycle, but you can also do 50 minutes of 
work and 10 minutes of rest. Find the pace that’s best for you; the most 
important thing is to be disciplined in completing each cycle. 

■ Start your work session with a ritual you enjoy and end it with a reward. 

■ Train your mind to return to the present when you find yourself getting 
distracted. Practice mindfulness or another form of meditation, go for a 
walk or a swim—whatever will help you get centered again. 

■ Work in a space where you will not be distracted. If you can’t do this at 
home, go to a library, a cafe, or, if your task involves playing the saxophone, 
a music studio. If you find that your surroundings continue to distract you, 
keep looking until you find the right place. 




■ Divide each activity into groups of related tasks, and assign each group its 
own place and time. For example, if you’re writing a magazine article, you 
could do research and take notes at home in the morning, write in the library 
in the afternoon, and edit on the couch at night. 

■ Bundle routine tasks—such as sending out invoices, making phone calls, and 
so on—and do them all at once. 


Advantages of Flow 

Disadvantages of Distraction 

A focused mind 

A wandering mind 

Living in the present 

Thinking about the past and the future 

We are free from worry 

Concerns about our daily life and the people around us 
invade our thoughts 

The hours fly by 

Every minute seems endless 

We feel in control 

We lose control and fail to complete the task at hand, or 
other tasks or people keep us from our work 

We prepare thoroughly 

We act without being prepared 

We know what we should be doing at any given moment 

We frequently get stuck and don’t know how to proceed 

Our mind is clear and overcomes all obstacles to the flow of 
thought 

We are plagued by doubts, concerns, and low self-esteem 

It’s pleasant 

It’s boring and exhausting 

Our ego fades: We are not the ones controlling the activity or 
task we’re doing—the task is leading us 

Constant self-criticism: Our ego is present and we feel 
frustrated 


Flow in Japan: Takumis, engineers, geniuses, and otakus 

What do takumis (artisans), engineers, inventors, and otakus (fans of anime and 
manga) have in common? They all understand the importance of flowing with 
their ikigai at all times. 

One widespread stereotype about people in Japan is that they’re exceptionally 
dedicated and hardworking, even though some Japanese people say they look like 
they’re working harder than they really are. There is no doubt, though, about their 
ability to be completely absorbed in a task, or about their perseverance when 
there is a problem to be solved. One of the first words one learns when starting 
Japanese lessons is ganbaru , which means “to persevere” or “to stay firm by doing 
one’s best.” 




Japanese people often apply themselves to even the most basic tasks with an 
intensity that borders on obsession. We see this in all kinds of contexts, from the 
“retirees” taking meticulous care of their rice fields in the mountains of Nagano 
to the college students working the weekend shift in convenience stores known as 
konbinis. If you go to Japan, you’ll experience this attention to detail firsthand in 
almost every transaction. 

Walk into one of the stores that sell handcrafted objects in Naha, Kanazawa, 
or Kyoto and you’ll also discover that Japan is a treasure trove of traditional 
craftwork. The people of Japan have a unique talent for creating new 
technologies while preserving artisanal traditions and techniques. 


The art of the takumi 

Toyota employs “artisans” who are able to make a certain type of screw by hand. 
These takumi, or experts in a particular manual skill, are extremely important to 
Toyota, and they are hard to replace. Some of them are the only people who 
know how to perform their exact skill, and it doesn’t seem as though a new 
generation is going to take up the mantle. 

Turntable needles are another example: They’re produced almost exclusively 
in Japan, where you can find the last remaining people who know how to use the 
machinery required to make these precision needles, and who are trying to pass 
on their knowledge to their descendants. 

We met a takumi on a visit to Kumano, a small town near Hiroshima. We were 
there for the day, working on a photo essay for one of the most famous brands of 
makeup brushes in the West. The billboard welcoming visitors to Kumano shows 
a mascot holding a large brush. In addition to the brush factories, the town is full 
of little houses and vegetable gardens; heading farther in, you can see several 
Shinto shrines at the base of the mountains that surround the town. 

We spent hours taking photos in factories full of people in orderly rows, each 
doing a single task—such as painting the handles of the brushes or loading boxes 
of them onto trucks—before we realized we still hadn’t seen anyone actually 
putting bristles into the brush heads. 

After we asked about this and got the runaround several times, the president 
of one company agreed to show us how it was done. He led us out of the building 
and asked us to get into his car. After a five-minute drive we parked next to 
another, smaller structure and climbed the stairs. He opened a door and we 

11mfrv o email mrvm -fill^rl \ui tU tUot 1 m Im^pKz nafura 1 linTit 


VV CilJVV^Va 111LV/ Cl &gt;3±±1CI±± 1 UVJill IJLlll^Va VV1LJL1 VV lllUU VV O LJLJLCIL IV^t 111 1U V V^IJ licit 111 Cll ±±£,111. 

In the middle of the room was a woman wearing a mask. You could see only 
her eyes. She was so focused on choosing individual bristles for the brushes— 
gracefully moving her hands and fingers, using scissors and combs to sort the 
bristles—that she didn’t even notice our presence. Her movements were so quick 
it was hard to tell what she was doing. 

The president of the company interrupted her to let her know that we’d be 
taking photos as she worked. We couldn’t see her mouth, but the glint in her eye 
and the cheerful inflection in her speech let us know she was smiling. She looked 
happy and proud talking about her work and responsibilities. 

We had to use extremely fast shutter speeds to capture her movements. Her 
hands danced and flowed in concert with her tools and the bristles she was 
sorting. 

The president told us that this takumi was one of the most important people in 
the company, even though she was hidden away in a separate building. Every 
bristle of every brush the company made passed through her hands. 


Steve Jobs in Japan 

Apple cofounder Steve Jobs was a big fan of Japan. Not only did he visit the Sony 
factories in the 1980s and adopt many of their methods when he founded Apple, 
he was also captivated by the simplicity and quality of Japanese porcelain in 
Kyoto. 

It was not, however, an artisan from Kyoto who won Steve Jobs’s devotion, but 
rather a takumi from Toyama named Yukio Shakunaga, who used a technique 
called Etchu Seto-yaki, known by only a few. 

On a visit to Kyoto, Jobs heard of an exhibition of Shakunaga’s work. He 
immediately understood that there was something special about Shakunaga’s 
porcelain. As a matter of fact, he bought several cups, vases, and plates, and went 
back to the show three times that week. 

Jobs returned to Kyoto several times over the course of his life in search of 
inspiration, and ended up meeting Shakunaga in person. It is said that Jobs had 
many questions for him—almost all of them about the fabrication process and the 
type of porcelain he used. 

Shakunaga explained that he used white porcelain he extracted himself from 
mountains in the Toyama prefecture, making him the only artist of his ilk 


familiar with the fabrication process of porcelain objects from their origins in the 
mountains to their final form—an authentic takumi. 

Jobs was so impressed that he considered going to Toyama to see the mountain 
where Shakunaga got his porcelain, but thought better of it when he heard that it 
was more than four hours by train from Kyoto. 

In an interview after Jobs’s death, Shakunaga said he was very proud that his 
work had been appreciated by the man who created the iPhone. He added that 
Jobs’s last purchase from him had been a set of twelve teacups. Jobs had asked 
for something special, “a new style.” To satisfy this request, Shakunaga made 150 
teacups in the process of testing out new ideas. Of these, he chose the twelve best 
and sent them to the Jobs family. 

Ever since his first trip to Japan, Jobs was fascinated and inspired by the 
country’s artisans, engineers (especially at Sony), philosophy (especially Zen), and 
cuisine (especially sushi).- 


Sophisticated simplicity 

What do Japanese artisans, engineers, Zen philosophy, and cuisine have in 
common? Simplicity and attention to detail. It is not a lazy simplicity but a 
sophisticated one that searches out new frontiers, always taking the object, the 
body and mind, or the cuisine to the next level, according to one’s ikigai. 

As Csikszentmihalyi would say, the key is always having a meaningful 
challenge to overcome in order to maintain flow. 

The documentary Jiro Dreams of Sushi gives us another example of a takumi, 
this time in the kitchen. Its protagonist has been making sushi every day for more 
than eighty years, and owns a small sushi restaurant near the Ginza subway station 
in Tokyo. He and his son go every day to the famous Tsukiji fish market and 
choose the best fish to bring back to the restaurant. 

In the documentary, we see one of Jiro’s apprentices learning to make tamago 
(a thin, slightly sweet omelet). No matter how hard he tries, he can’t get Jiro’s 
approval. He keeps practicing for years until he finally does. 

Why does the apprentice refuse to give up? Doesn’t he get bored cooking eggs 
every day? No, because making sushi is his ikigai, too. 

Both Jiro and his son are culinary artists. They don’t get bored when they cook 
—they achieve a state of flow. They enjoy themselves completely when they are 


in the kitchen; that is their happiness, their ikigai. They’ve learned to take 
pleasure in their work, to lose their sense of time. 

Beyond the close relationship between father and son, which helps them keep 
the challenge going each day, they also work in a quiet, peaceful environment that 
allows them to concentrate. Even after receiving a three-star rating from 
Michelin, they never considered opening other locations or expanding the 
business. They serve just ten patrons at a time at the bar of their small restaurant. 
Jiro’s family isn’t looking to make money; instead they value good working 
conditions and creating an environment in which they can flow while making the 
best sushi in the world. 

Jiro, like Yukio Shakunaga, begins his work at “the source.” He goes to the 
fish market to find the best tuna; Shakunaga goes to the mountains to find the 
best porcelain. When they get down to work, both become one with the object 
they are creating. This unity with the object that they reach in a state of flow 
takes on special meaning in Japan, where, according to Shintoism, forests, trees, 
and objects have a kami (spirit or god) within them. 

When someone—whether an artist, an engineer, or a chef—sets out to create 
something, his or her responsibility is to use nature to give it “life” while 
respecting that nature at every moment. During this process, the artisan becomes 
one with the object and flows with it. An ironworker would say that metal has a 
life of its own, just as someone making ceramics would say that the clay does. 

The Japanese are skilled at bringing nature and technology together: not man 
versus nature, but rather a union of the two. 


The purity of Ghibli 

There are those who say that the Shinto value of being connected with nature is 
vanishing. One of the harshest critics of this loss is another artist with a clearly 
defined ikigai : Hayao Miyazaki, the director of the animated films produced by 
Studio Ghibli. 

In nearly all his films we see humans, technology, fantasy, and nature in a state 
of conflict—and, in the end, coming together. One of the most poignant 
metaphors in his film Spirited Away is an obese spirit covered in trash that 
represents the pollution of the rivers. 

In Miyazaki’s films, forests have personalities, trees have feelings, and robots 
befriend birds. Considered a national treasure by the Japanese government, 


Miyazaki is an artist capable of becoming completely absorbed in his art. He uses 
a cell phone from the late 1990s, and he makes his entire team draw by hand. He 
“directs” his films by rendering on paper even the tiniest detail, achieving flow by 
drawing, not by using a computer. Thanks to this obsession on the director’s part, 
Studio Ghibli is one of the only studios in the world where almost the entire 
production process is carried out using traditional techniques. 

Those who have visited Studio Ghibli know that it is fairly typical, on a given 
Sunday to see a solitary individual tucked away in a corner, hard at work—a man 
in simple clothes who will greet them with an ohayo (hello) without looking up. 

Miyazaki is so passionate about his work that he spends many Sundays in the 
studio, enjoying the state of flow, putting his ikigai above all else. Visitors know 
that under no circumstances is one to bother Miyazaki, who is known for his 
quick temper—especially if he is interrupted while drawing. 

In 2013, Miyazaki announced he was going to retire. To commemorate his 
retirement, the television station NHK made a documentary showing him in his 
last days at work. He is drawing in nearly every scene of the film. In one scene, 
several of his colleagues are seen coming out of a meeting, and there he is, 
drawing in a corner, paying no attention to them. In another scene, he is shown 
walking to work on December 30 (a national holiday in Japan) and opening the 
doors of Studio Ghibli so he can spend the day there, drawing alone. 

Miyazaki can’t stop drawing. The day after his “retirement,” instead of going 
on vacation or staying at home, he went to Studio Ghibli and sat down to draw. 
His colleagues put on their best poker faces, not knowing what to say. One year 
later, he announced he wouldn’t make any more feature films but that he would 
keep on drawing until the day he died. 

Can someone really retire if he is passionate about what he does? 


The recluses 

It is not only the Japanese who have this capacity; there are artists and scientists 
all over the world with strong, clear ikigais. They do what they love until their 
dying day. 

The last thing Einstein wrote before closing his eyes forever was a formula 
that attempted to unite all the forces of the universe in a single theory. When he 
died, he was still doing what he loved. If he hadn’t been a physicist, he said, he 
would have been happy as a musician. When he wasn’t focused on physics or 


mathematics, he enjoyed playing the violin. Reaching a state of flow while 
working on his formulas or playing music, his two ikigais, brought him endless 
pleasure. 

Many such artists might seem misanthropic or reclusive, but what they are 
really doing is protecting the time that brings them happiness, sometimes at the 
expense of other aspects of their lives. They are outliers who apply the principles 
of flow to their lives to an extreme. 

Another example of this kind of artist is the novelist Haruki Murakami. He 
sees only a close circle of friends, and appears in public in Japan only once every 
few years. 

Artists know how important it is to protect their space, control their 
environment, and be free of distractions if they want to flow with their ikigai. 


Microflow: Enjoying mundane tasks 

But what happens when we have to, say, do the laundry, mow the lawn, or attend 
to paperwork? Is there a way to make these mundane tasks enjoyable? 

Near the Shinjuku subway station, in one of the neural centers of Tokyo, there 
is a supermarket that still employs elevator operators. The elevators are fairly 
standard and could easily be operated by the customers, but the store prefers to 
provide the service of someone holding the door open for you, pushing the button 
for your floor, and bowing as you exit. 

If you ask around, you’ll leam that there is one elevator operator who has been 
doing the same job since 2004. She is always smiling and enthusiastic about her 
work. How is she able to enjoy such a job? Doesn’t she get bored doing 
something so repetitive? 

On closer inspection, it becomes clear that the elevator operator is not just 
pushing buttons but is instead performing a whole sequence of movements. She 
begins by greeting the customers with a songlike salutation followed by a bow and 
a welcoming wave of the hand. Then she presses the elevator button with a 
graceful movement, as though she is a geisha offering a client a cup of tea. 

Csikszentmihalyi calls this microflow. 

We’ve all been bored in a class or at a conference and started doodling to keep 
ourselves entertained. Or whistled while painting a wall. If we’re not truly being 
challenged, we get bored and add a layer of complexity to amuse ourselves. Our 
ability to turn routine tasks into moments of microflow, into something we enjoy, 

ic Vai/ tn Anr Koinrr Vionm? cinop oil u oi7P Ia r\r\ ciiaIi tocVc 


Id 1YV/J IU V/UI LJV^llJLg, JLJLCippj , OlllV^V^ VV Y/ Clll HCi V V-/ IU KXKJ OLIV^JLI LCl&gt;3JYk3. 

Even Bill Gates washes the dishes every night. He says he enjoys it—that it 
helps him relax and clear his mind, and that he tries to do it a little better each 
day, following an established order or set of rules he’s made for himself: plates 
first, forks second, and so on. 

It’s one of his daily moments of microflow. 

Richard Feynman, one of the most important physicists of all time, also took 
pleasure in routine tasks. W. Daniel Hillis, one of the founders of the 
supercomputer manufacturer Thinking Machines, hired Feynman to work on the 
development of a computer that could handle parallel processing when he was 
already world famous. He says Feynman showed up on his first day of work and 
said, “OK, boss, what’s my assignment?” They didn’t have anything prepared, so 
they asked him to work on a certain mathematical problem. He immediately 
realized they were giving him an irrelevant task to keep him busy and said, “That 
sounds like a bunch of baloney—give me something real to do.” 

So they sent him to a nearby shop to buy office supplies, and he completed his 
assignment with a smile on his face. When he didn’t have something important to 
do or needed to rest his mind, Feynman dedicated himself to microflowing—say, 
painting the office walls. 

Weeks later, after visiting the Thinking Machines offices a group of investors 
declared, “You have a Nobel laureate in there painting walls and soldering 
circuits. 


Instant vacations: Getting there through meditation 

Training the mind can get us to a place of flow more quickly. Meditation is one 
way to exercise our mental muscles. 

There are many types of meditation, but they all have the same objective: 
calming the mind, observing our thoughts and emotions, and centering our focus 
on a single object. 

The basic practice involves sitting with a straight back and focusing on your 
breath. Anyone can do it, and you feel a difference after just one session. By 
fixing your attention on the air moving in and out of your nose, you can slow the 
torrent of thoughts and clear your mental horizons. 


The Archer’s Secret 



The winner of the 1988 Olympic gold medal for archery was a seventeen- 
year-old woman from South Korea. When asked how she prepared, she 
replied that the most important part of her training was meditating for two 
hours each day. 


If we want to get better at reaching a state of flow, meditation is an excellent 
antidote to our smartphones and their notifications constantly clamoring for our 
attention. 

One of the most common mistakes among people starting to meditate is 
worrying about doing it “right,” achieving absolute mental silence, or reaching 
“nirvana.” The most important thing is to focus on the journey. 

Since the mind is a constant swirl of thoughts, ideas, and emotions, slowing 
down the “centrifuge”—even for just a few seconds—can help us feel more 
rested and leave us with a sense of clarity. 

In fact, one of the things we learn in the practice of meditation is not to worry 
about anything that flits across our mental screen. The idea of killing our boss 
might flash into our mind, but we simply label it as a thought and let it pass like a 
cloud, without judging or rejecting it. It is only a thought—one of the sixty 
thousand we have every day, according to some experts. 

Meditation generates alpha and theta brain waves. For those experienced in 
meditation, these waves appear right away, while it might take a half hour for a 
beginner to experience them. These relaxing brain waves are the ones that are 
activated right before we fall asleep, as we lie in the sun, or right after taking a 
hot bath. 

We all carry a spa with us everywhere we go. It’s just a matter of knowing how 
to get in—something anyone can do, with a bit of practice. 


Humans as ritualistic beings 

Life is inherently ritualistic. We could argue that humans naturally follow rituals 
that keep us busy. In some modem cultures, we have been forced out of our 
ritualistic lives to pursue goal after goal in order to be seen as successful. But 
throughout history, humans have always been busy. We were hunting, cooking, 
farming, exploring, and raising families—activities that were structured as rituals 
to keep us busy throughout our days. 


-c *11 


-1 _ *1 


IT 


.1 1 





mil in an unusual way, rnuais sun permeaie aany lire ana Dusmess pracuces in 
modern Japan. The main religions in Japan—Confucianism, Buddhism, and 
Shintoism—are all ones in which the rituals are more important than absolute 
rules. 

When doing business in Japan, process, manners, and how you work on 
something is more important than the final results. Whether this is good or bad 
for the economy is beyond the scope of this book. What is indisputable, though, 
is that finding flow in a “ritualistic workplace” is much easier than in one in 
which we are continually stressed out trying to achieve unclear goals set by our 
bosses. 

Rituals give us clear rules and objectives, which help us enter a state of flow. 
When we have only a big goal in front of us, we might feel lost or overwhelmed 
by it; rituals help us by giving us the process, the substeps, on the path to 
achieving a goal. When confronted with a big goal, try to break it down into parts 
and then attack each part one by one. 

Focus on enjoying your daily rituals, using them as tools to enter a state of 
flow. Don’t worry about the outcome—it will come naturally. Happiness is in the 
doing, not in the result. As a rule of thumb, remind yourself: “Rituals over goals.” 

The happiest people are not the ones who achieve the most. They are the ones 
who spend more time than others in a state of flow. 


Using flow to find your ikigai 

After reading this chapter you should have a better idea of which activities in 
your life make you enter flow. Write all of them on a piece of paper, then ask 
yourself these questions: What do the activities that drive you to flow have in 
common? Why do those activities drive you to flow? For example, are all the 
activities you most like doing ones that you practice alone or with other people? 
Do you flow more when doing things that require you to move your body or just 
to think? 

In the answers to these questions you might find the underlying ikigai that 
drives your life. If you don’t, then keep searching by going deeper into what you 
like by spending more of your time in the activities that make you flow. Also, try 
new things that are not on the list of what makes you flow but that are similar and 
that you are curious about. For example, if photography is something that drives 
you into flow, you could also try painting; you might even like it more! Or if you 
love snowboarding and have never tried surfing . . . 


Flow is mysterious. It is like a muscle: the more you train it, the more you will 
flow, and the closer you will be to your ikigai. 




MASTERS OF LONGEVITY 

Words of wisdom from the 
longest-living people in the world 



when we started working on this book, we didn’t want to just research the factors that contribute to a long and 
happy life; we wanted to hear from the true masters of this art. 

The interviews we conducted in Okinawa merit their own chapter, but in the 
section that precedes it we have provided an overview of the life philosophies of 
a few international champions of longevity. We’re talking about 
supercentenarians—people who live to 110 years of age or more. 

The term was coined in 1970 by Norris McWhirter, editor of The Guinness 
Book of World Records. Its use became more widespread in the 1990s, after it 
appeared in William Strauss and Neil Howe’s Generations. Today there are an 
estimated 300 to 450 supercentenarians in the world, although the age of only 
around 75 of them has been confirmed. They aren’t superheroes, but we could see 
them as such for having spent far more time on this planet than the average life 
expectancy would predict. 

Given the rise in life expectancy around the world, the number of 
supercentenarians might also increase. A healthy and purposeful life could help 
us join their ranks. 

Let’s take a look at what a few of them have to say. 


Misao Okawa (117) 

“Eat and sleep, and you’ll live a long time. You have to learn to 
relax.” 

According to the Gerontology Research Group, until April 2015, the oldest living 
person in the world was Misao Okawa, who passed away in a care facility in 
Osaka, Japan, after living for 117 years and 27 days. 

The daughter of a textile merchant, she was born in 1898, when Spain lost its 
colonies in Cuba and the Philippines, and the United States annexed Hawaii and 
launched Pepsi-Cola. Until she was 110, this woman—who lived in three 
different centuries—cared for herself unassisted. 

When specialists asked about her self-care routine, Misao answered simply, 
“Eating sushi and sleeping,” to which we should add, having a tremendous thirst 


for life. When they inquired about her secret for longevity, she answered with a 
smile, “I ask myself the same thing.”- 

Proof that Japan continues to be a factory of long life: In July of the same year 
Sakari Momoi passed away at 112 years and 150 days old. At the time he was the 
oldest man in the world, though he was younger than fifty-seven women. 


Maria Capovilla (116) 

“I’ve never eaten meat in my life.” 

Born in Ecuador in 1889, Maria Capovilla was recognized by Guinness as the 
world’s oldest person. She died of pneumonia in 2006, at 116 years and 347 days 
old, leaving behind three children, twelve grandchildren, and twenty great-and 
great-great-grandchildren. 

She gave one of her last interviews at age 107, sharing her memories and her 
thoughts: 


I’m happy, and I give thanks to God, who keeps me going. I never thought I'd live so long, I thought I'd 
die long ago. My husband, Antonio Capovilla, was the captain of a ship. He passed away at 84. We had 
two daughters and a son, and now I have many grandchildren and great-grandchildren. 

Things were better, back in the old days. People behaved better. We used to dance, but we were 
more restrained; there was this one song I loved dancing to: “Maria” by Luis Alarcon. I still remember 
most of the words. I also remember many prayers, and say them every day. 

I like the waltz, and can still dance it. I also still make crafts, I still do some of the things I did when 
I was in school.^ 


When she had finished recalling her past, she began to dance—one of her 
great passions—with an energy that made her seem decades younger. 

When asked about her secret for longevity, she responded simply, “I don’t 
know what the secret to long life is. The only thing I do is I’ve never eaten meat in 
my life. I attribute it to that.” 


Jeanne Calment (122) 

“Everything’s fine.” 

Born in Arles, France, in February 1875, Jeanne Calment lived until August 4, 
1997, making her, at 122, the oldest person of verified age in history. She 
jokingly said that she “competed with Methuselah,” and there is no question that 


she broke numerous records as she went on celebrating birthdays. 

She died of natural causes at the end of a happy life during which she denied 
herself almost nothing. She rode a bicycle until she turned 100. She lived on her 
own until 110, when she agreed to move into a nursing home after accidentally 
starting a small fire in her apartment. She stopped smoking at 120, when her 
cataracts started making it hard for her to bring a cigarette to her lips. 

One of her secrets may have been her sense of humor. As she said on her 
120th birthday, “I see badly, I hear badly, and I feel bad, but everything’s fine.”- 


Walter Breuning (114) 

“If you keep your mind and body busy, you’ll be around a long 
time.” 

Born in Minnesota in 1896, Walter Breuning was able to see three centuries in his 
lifetime. He died in Montana in 2011, from natural causes; he’d had two wives 
and a fifty-year career on the railroad. At eighty-three he retired to an assisted 
living center in Montana, where he remained until his death. He is the second- 
oldest man (of verified age) ever born in the United States. 

He gave many interviews in his final years, insisting that his longevity 
stemmed from, among other things, his habit of eating only two meals per day 
and working for as many years as he could. “Your mind and your body. You keep 
both busy,” he said on his 112th birthday, “you’ll be here a long time.” Back then, 
he was still exercising every day. 

Among Breuning’s other secrets: He had a habit of helping others, and he 
wasn’t afraid of dying. As he declared in a 2010 interview with the Associated 
Press, “We’re all going to die. Some people are scared of dying. Never be afraid 
to die. Because you’re born to die.”- 

Before passing away in 2011, he is said to have told a pastor that he’d made a 
deal with God: If he wasn’t going to get better, it was time to go. 


Alexander Imich (111) 

“I just haven’t died yet.” 

Bom in Poland in 1903, Alexander Imich was a chemist and parapsychologist 

rpeirlincr in thp TTnifprl fitntpe whn nftpr thn Hpnth of hie nrpHpppeenr in 901 A 


ivuiviiix^ in uiv \_y 111 iv v_/ m ivu ttiivj iu ivi mv uvuui vi mu |-»i vv»v wuuv/i 111 i-v/ x ■ «, 

became the oldest man of authenticated age in the world. Imich himself died 
shortly thereafter, in June of that year, leaving behind a long life rich with 
experiences. 

Imich attributed his longevity to, among other things, never drinking alcohol. 
“It’s not as though I’d won the Nobel Prize,” he said upon being declared the 
world’s oldest man. “I never thought I’d get to be so old.” When asked about his 
secret to living so long, his answer was “I don’t know. I just haven’t died yet.”- 


Ikigai artists 

The secret to long life, however, is not held by supercentenarians alone. There are 
many people of advanced age who, though they haven’t made it into Guinness 
World Records , offer us inspiration and ideas for bringing energy and meaning to 
our lives. 

Artists, for example, who carry the torch of their ikigai instead of retiring, 
have this power. 

Art, in all its forms, is an ikigai that can bring happiness and purpose to our 
days. Enjoying or creating beauty is free, and something all human beings have 
access to. 

Hokusai, the Japanese artist who made woodblock prints in the ukiyo-e style 
and lived for 88 years, from the mid-eighteenth to the mid-nineteenth century, 
added this postscript to the first edition of his One Hundred Views of Mount 
Fuji:- 


All that I have produced before the age of 70 is not worth being counted. It is at the age of 73 that I 
have somewhat begun to understand the structure of true nature, of animals and grasses, and trees and 
birds, and fishes and insects; consequently at 80 years of age I shall have made still more progress; at 
90 I hope to have penetrated into the mystery of things; at 100 years of age I should have reached 
decidedly a marvelous degree, and when I shall be 110, all that I do, every point and every line, shall be 
instinct with life. 


In the pages that follow, we’ve collected some of the most inspirational words 
from artists interviewed by Camille Sweeney for the New York Times .- Of those 
still living, none have retired, and all still enjoy their passion, which they plan to 
pursue until their final breath, demonstrating that when you have a clear purpose, 
no one can stop you. 



The actor Christopher Plummer, still working at eighty-six, reveals a dark 
desire shared by many who love the profession: “We want to drop dead onstage. 
That would be a nice theatrical way to go.”- 

Osamu Tezuka, the father of modern Japanese manga, shared this feeling. 
Before he died in 1989, his last words as he drew one final cartoon were “Please, 
just let me work!’- 

The eighty-six-year-old filmmaker Frederick Wiseman declared on a stroll 
through Paris that he likes to work, which is why he does it with such intensity. 
“Everybody complains about their aches and pains and all that, but my friends are 
either dead or are still working,” he said.— 

Carmen Herrera, a painter who just entered her one hundredth year, sold her 
first canvas at age eighty-nine. Today her work is in the permanent collections of 
the Tate Modem and the Museum of Modern Art. When asked how she viewed 
her future, she responded, “I am always waiting to finish the next thing. Absurd, I 
know. I go day by day.”— 


Never Stop Learning 

“You may grow old and trembling in your anatomies, you may lie awake 
at night listening to the disorder of your veins, you may miss your only 
love, you may see the world about you devastated by evil lunatics, or know 
your honour trampled in the sewers of baser minds. There is only one 
thing for it then—to leam. Learn why the world wags and what wags it. 
That is the only thing which the mind can never exhaust, never alienate, 
never be tortured by, never fear or distrust, and never dream of 
regretting.” 

—T. H. White, The Once and Future King 


For his part, naturalist and author Edward O. Wilson asserted, “I feel I have 
enough experience to join those who are addressing big questions. About ten 
years ago, when I began reading and thinking more broadly about the questions of 
what are we, where did we come from and where are we going, I was astonished 
at how little this was being done.”— 

Ellsworth Kelly, an artist who passed away in 2015 at the age of ninety-two, 
assured us that the idea that we lose our faculties with age is, in part, a myth, 



because instead we develop a greater clarity and capacity for observation. “It’s 
one thing about getting older, you see more. . . . Every day I’m continuing to see 
new things. That’s why there are new paintings.”— 

At eighty-six, the architect Frank Gehry reminds us that some buildings can 
take seven years “from the time you’re hired until you’re finished,”- - a fact that 
favors a patient attitude with regard to the passage of time. The man responsible 
for the Guggenheim Museum Bilbao, however, knows how to live in the here and 
now: “You stay in your time. You don’t go backward. I think if you relate to the 
time you’re in, you keep your eyes and ears open, read the paper, see what’s going 
on, stay curious about everything, you will automatically be in your time.”— 


Longevity in Japan 

Because of its robust civil registry, many of those verified as having lived 
the longest are found in the United States; however, there are many 
centenarians living in remote villages in other countries. A peaceful life in 
the countryside seems pretty common among people who have watched a 
century pass. 

Without question, the international superstar of longevity is Japan, 
which has the highest life expectancy of any country in the world. In 
addition to a healthy diet, which we will explore in detail, and an 
integrated health care system in which people go to the doctor for regular 
checkups to prevent disease, longevity in Japan is closely tied to its 
culture, as we will see later on. 

The sense of community, and the fact that Japanese people make an 
effort to stay active until the very end, are key elements of their secret to 
long life. 

If you want to stay busy even when there’s no need to work, there has 
to be an ikigai on your horizon, a purpose that guides you throughout your 
life and pushes you to make things of beauty and utility for the 
community and yourself. 




LESSONS FROM JAPAN’S CENTENARIANS 

Traditions and proverbs for 
happiness and longevity 



TOGETToOgimi, we had to fly nearly three hours from Tokyo to Naha, the capital of Okinawa. Several months 
earlier we had contacted the town council of a place known as the Village of Longevity to explain the 
purpose of our trip and our intention to interview the oldest members of the community. After numerous 
conversations, we finally got the help we were looking for and were able to rent a house just outside the 
town. 

One year after starting this project, we found ourselves on the doorstep of 
some of the longest-living people in the world. 

We realized right away that time seems to have stopped there, as though the 
entire town were living in an endless here and now. 


Arriving in Ogimi 

After two hours on the road from Naha, we’re finally able to stop worrying about 
the traffic. To our left are the sea and an empty stretch of beach; to our right, the 
mountainous jungle of Okinawa’s Yanbaru forests. 

Once Route 58 passes Nago, where Orion beer—the pride of Okinawa—is 
made, it skirts the coast until it reaches Ogimi. Every now and then a few little 
houses and stores crop up in the narrow stretch of land between the road and the 
base of the mountain. 

We pass small clusters of houses scattered here and there as we enter the 
municipality of Ogimi, but the town doesn’t really seem to have a center. Our 
GPS finally guides us to our destination: the Center for the Support and 
Promotion of Well-Being, housed in an unattractive cinderblock building right 
off the highway. 

We go in through the back door, where a man named Taira is waiting for us. 
Beside him is a petite, cheerful woman who introduces herself as Yuki. Two 
other women immediately get up from desks and show us to a conference room. 
They serve us each a cup of green tea and a few shikuwasa, a small citrus fruit 
that packs a big nutritional punch, as we will see later on. 

Taira sits down across from us in his formal suit and opens up a large planner 
and a three-ring binder. Yuki sits next to him. The binder contains a list of all the 
town’s residents, organized by age and “club,” or moai. Taira points out that these 
groups of people who help one another are characteristic of Ogimi. The moai are 


not organized around any concrete objective; they function more like a family. 
Taira also tells us that volunteer work, rather than money, drives much of what 
happens in Ogimi. Everyone offers to pitch in, and the local government takes 
care of assigning tasks. This way, everyone can be useful and feels like a part of 
the community. 

Ogimi is the penultimate town before Cape Hedo, the northernmost point of 
the largest island in the archipelago. 

From the top of one of Ogimi’s mountains, we’re able to look down over the 
whole town. Almost everything is the green of the Yanbaru jungle, making us 
wonder where the nearly thirty-two hundred residents are hiding. We can see a 
few houses, but they’re scattered in little clusters near the sea or in small valleys 
accessible by side roads. 


Communal life 

We’re invited to eat in one of Ogimi’s few restaurants, but when we arrive the 
only three tables are already reserved. 

“Don’t worry, we’ll go to Churaumi instead. It never fills up,” says Yuki, 
walking back to her car. 

She’s still driving at age eighty-eight, and takes great pride in that. Her copilot 
is ninety-nine, and has also decided to spend the day with us. We have to drive 
fast to keep up with them on a highway that is sometimes more dirt than asphalt. 
Finally reaching the other end of the jungle, we can at last sit down to eat. 

“I don’t really go to restaurants,” Yuki says as we take our seats. “Almost 
everything I eat comes from my vegetable garden, and I buy my fish from 
Tanaka, who’s been my friend forever.” 

The restaurant is right by the sea and seems like something from the planet 
Tatooine, from Star Wars. The menu boasts in large letters that it serves “slow 
food” prepared with organic vegetables grown in the town. 

“But really,” Yuki continues, “food is the least important thing.” She is 
extroverted, and rather pretty. She likes to talk about her role as the director of 
several associations run by the local government. 

“Food won’t help you live longer,” she says, bringing to her lips a bite of the 
diminutive confection that followed our meal. “The secret is smiling and having a 
good time.” 

There are no bars and only a few restaurants in Ogimi, but those who live 

oro nmmr o rir*li or\r*i o 1 lifa tVi at ro\ ml atac omnnrl r*AmmnniH7 ppnfprc T U A fAU/tl 1C 


HJLV^l V^JLJLJ WJ Cl 1 JLV^JLl OWV^ACll 1111/ 111 Cl l V U1 V C'O CU.VSU11V* VsVXLXU.llUlll.ljr V^V^llll^l O. X 11IU VV11 Id 

divided into seventeen neighborhoods, and each one has a president and several 
people in charge of things like culture, festivals, social activities, and longevity. 
Residents pay close attention to this last category. 

We’re invited to the community center of one of the seventeen neighborhoods. 
It is an old building right next to one of the mountains of the Yanbaru jungle, 
home to bunagaya, the town’s iconic sprites. 


The Bunagaya Spirits of the Yanbaru Jungle 

Bunagaya are magical creatures that inhabit the Yanbaru jungle near 
Ogimi and its surrounding towns. They manifest as children with long red 
hair, and like to hide in the jungle’s gajumaru (banyan) trees and go 
fishing on the beach. 

Many of Okinawa’s stories and fables are about bunagaya sprites. They 
are mischievous, playful, and unpredictable. Locals say that the bunagaya 
love the mountains, rivers, sea, trees, earth, wind, and animals, and that if 
you want to befriend them, you have to show respect for nature. 


A birthday party 

When we arrive at the neighborhood’s community center, we’re greeted by a 
group of about twenty people who proudly proclaim, “The youngest among us is 
eighty-three!” 

We conduct our interviews at a large table while drinking green tea. When we 
finish, we’re brought to an event space, where we celebrate the birthdays of three 
members of the group. One woman is turning ninety-nine, another ninety-four, 
and one “young man” has just reached eighty-nine. 

We sing a few songs popular in the village and finish up with “Happy 
Birthday” in English. The woman turning ninety-nine blows out the candles and 
thanks everyone for coming to her party. We eat homemade shikuwasa cake and 
end up dancing and celebrating as though it were the birthday of a 
twentysomething. 

It’s the first party, but not the last, that we’ll attend during our week in the 
village. We’ll also do karaoke with a group of seniors who sing better than we do, 
and attend a traditional festival with local bands, dancers, and food stands at the 





foot of a mountain. 


Celebrate each day, together 

Celebrations seem to be an essential part of life in Ogimi. 

We’re invited to watch a game of gateball, one of the most popular sports 
among Okinawa’s older residents. It involves hitting a ball with a mallet-like stick. 
It is a low-impact sport that can be played anywhere, and is a good excuse to 
move around and have fun as a group. The residents hold local competitions, and 
there is no age limit for participants. 

We participate in the weekly game and lose to a woman who recently turned 
104. Everyone cheers, and the defeated look on our faces elicits laughter. 

In addition to playing and celebrating as a community, spirituality is also 
essential to the happiness of the village’s residents. 


The gods of Okinawa 

The main religion in Okinawa is known as Ryukyu Shinto. Ryukyu is the original 
name of the Okinawa archipelago, and Shinto means “the path of the gods.”- 
Ryukyu Shinto combines elements of Chinese Taoism, Confucianism, Buddhism, 
and Shintoism with shamanistic and animistic elements. 

According to this ancient faith, the world is populated by an infinite number 
of spirits divided into several types: spirits of the home, of the forest, of the trees, 
and of the mountains. It is important to appease these spirits through rituals and 
festivals, and by consecrating sacred grounds. 

Okinawa is full of sacred jungles and forests, where many of the two main 
kinds of temples are found: the utaki and the uganju. We visited an uganju, or 
small, open-air temple adorned with incense and coins, next to a waterfall in 
Ogimi. The utaki is a collection of stones where people go to pray and where, 
supposedly, spirits gather. 

In Okinawa’s religious practice, women are considered spiritually superior to 
men, whereas the opposite is true of traditional Shintoism in the rest of Japan. 
Yuta are women chosen as mediums by their communities to make contact with 
the spirit realm through traditional rites. 


Ancestor worship is another important feature of spiritual practice in 
Okinawa, and in Japan in general. The home of each generation’s firstborn 
usually contains a butsudan, or small altar, used to pray for and make offerings to 
the family’s ancestors. 


Mabui 

Every person has an essence, or mabui. This mabui is our spirit and the 
source of our life force. It is immortal and makes us who we are. 

Sometimes, the mabui of someone who has died is trapped in the body 
of a living person. This situation requires a separation ritual to free the 
mabui of the deceased; it often happens when a person dies suddenly— 
especially at a young age—and his or her mabui does not want to move on 
to the realm of the dead. 

A mabui can also be passed from person to person by physical contact. 
A grandmother who leaves her granddaughter a ring transfers a part of her 
mabui to her. Photographs can also be a medium for passing mabui among 
people. 


The older, the stronger 

Looking back, our days in Ogimi were intense but relaxed—sort of like the 
lifestyle of the locals, who always seemed to be busy with important tasks but 
who, upon closer inspection, did everything with a sense of calm. They were 
always pursuing their ikigai, but they were never in a rush. 

Not only did they seem to be happily busy, but we also noticed that they 
followed the other principles for happiness that Washington Burnap stated two 
hundred years ago: “The grand essentials to happiness in this life are something to 
do, something to love, and something to hope for.”- 

On our last day, we went to buy gifts at a small market at the edge of town. 
The only things sold there are local vegetables, green tea, and shikuwasa juice, 
along with bottles of water from a spring hidden in the Yanbaru forests, bearing 
labels that read “Longevity Water.” 

We bought ourselves some of this Longevity Water and drank it in the parking 
lot, looking out over the sea and hoping that the little bottles that promised a 



magic elixir would bring us health and long life, and would help us find our own 
ikigai. Then we took a photo with a statue of a bunagaya, and walked up to it one 
last time to read the inscription: 


A Declaration from the Town Where People Live Longest 

At 80 I am still a child. 

When I come to see you at 90, 
send me away to wait until I’m 100. 

The older, the stronger; 

let us not depend too much on our children as we age. 

If you seek long life and health, you are welcome in our village, 

where you will be blessed by nature, 

and together we will discover the secret to longevity. 

April 23, 1993 
Ogimi Federation of Senior Citizen Clubs 


The interviews 

Over the course of a week we conducted a total of one hundred interviews, asking 
the eldest members of the community about their life philosophy, their ikigai, and 
the secrets to longevity. We filmed these conversations with two cameras for use 
in a little documentary, and chose a few especially meaningful and inspiring 
statements to include in this section of the book. 

1. Don’t worry 

“The secret to a long life is not to worry. And to keep your heart young—don’t let it grow old. Open 
your heart to people with a nice smile on your face. If you smile and open your heart, your 
grandchildren and everyone else will want to see you.” 

“The best way to avoid anxiety is to go out in the street and say hello to people. I do it every day. I go 
out there and say, ‘Hello!’ and ‘See you later!’ Then I go home and care for my vegetable garden. In the 
afternoon, I spend time with friends.” 

“Here, everyone gets along. We try not to cause problems. Spending time together and having fun is 
the only thing that matters.” 



2. Cultivate good habits 

“I feel joy every morning waking up at six and opening the curtains to look out at my garden, where I 
grow my own vegetables. I go right outside to check on my tomatoes, my mandarin oranges ... I love 
the sight of them—it relaxes me. After an hour in the garden I go back inside and make breakfast.” 

“I plant my own vegetables and cook them myself. That’s my ikigai .” 

“The key to staying sharp in old age is in your fingers. From your fingers to your brain, and back again. 
If you keep your fingers busy, you'll live to see one hundred.” 

“I get up at four every day. I set my alarm for that time, have a cup of coffee, and do a little exercise, 
lifting my arms. That gives me energy for the rest of the day.” 

“I eat a bit of everything; I think that’s the secret. I like variety in what I eat; I think it tastes better.” 
“Working. If you don’t work, your body breaks down.” 

“When I wake up, I go to the butsudan and light incense. You have to keep your ancestors in mind. It’s 
the first thing I do every morning.” 

“I wake up every day at the same time, early, and spend the morning in my vegetable garden. I go 
dancing with my friends once a week.” 

“I do exercise every day, and every morning I go for a little walk.” 

“I never forget to do my taiso exercises when I get up.” 

“Eating vegetables—it helps you live longer.” 

“To live a long time you need to do three things: exercise to stay healthy, eat well, and spend time with 
people.” 

3. Nurture your friendships every day 

“Getting together with my friends is my most important ikigai. We all get together here and talk—it’s 
very important. I always know I'll see them all here tomorrow, and that’s one of my favorite things in 
life.” 

“My main hobby is getting together with friends and neighbors.” 

“Talking each day with the people you love, that’s the secret to a long life.” 

“I say, ‘Hello!’ and ‘See you later!’ to the children on their way to school, and wave at everyone who 
goes by me in their car. ‘Drive safely!’ I say. Between 7:20 a.m. and 8:15 a.m., I’m outside on my feet 
the whole time, saying hello to people. Once everyone’s gone, I go back inside.” 



'Chatting and drinking tea with my neighbors. That’s the best thing in life. And singing together. 


“I wake up at five every morning, leave the house, and walk to the sea. Then I go to a friend’s house 
and we have tea together. That’s the secret to long life: getting together with people, and going from 
place to place.” 


4. Live an unhurried life 

“My secret to a long life is always saying to myself, ‘Slow down,’ and ‘Relax.’ You live much longer if 
you’re not in a hurry.” 

“I make things with wicker. That’s my ikigai. The first thing I do when I wake up is pray. Then I do my 
exercises and eat breakfast. At seven I calmly start working on my wicker. When I get tired at five, I 
go visit my friends.” 

“Doing many different things every day. Always staying busy, but doing one thing at a time, without 
getting overwhelmed.” 

“The secret to long life is going to bed early, waking up early, and going for a walk. Living peacefully 
and enjoying the little things. Getting along with your friends. Spring, summer, fall, winter . . . 
enjoying each season, happily.” 

5. Be optimistic 

“Every day I say to myself, ‘Today will be full of health and energy. Live it to the fullest.’” 

“I’m ninety-eight, but consider myself young. I still have so much to do.” 

“Laugh. Laughter is the most important thing. I laugh wherever I go.” 

“I’m going to live to be a hundred. Of course I am! It’s a huge motivation for me.” 

“Dancing and singing with your grandchildren is the best thing in life.” 

“I feel very fortunate to have been born here. I give thanks for it every day.” 

“The most important thing in Ogirni, in life, is to keep smiling.” 

“I do volunteer work to give back to the village a bit of what it has given to me. For example, I use my 
car to help friends get to the hospital.” 

“There’s no secret to it. The trick is just to live.” 


Keys to the Ogimi Lifestyle 




■ One hundred percent of the people we interviewed keep a vegetable 
garden, and most of them also have fields of tea, mangoes, shikuwasa, 
and so on. 

■ All belong to some form of neighborhood association, where they feel 
cared for as though by family. 

■ They celebrate all the time, even little things. Music, song, and dance 
are essential parts of daily life. 

■ They have an important purpose in life, or several. They have an ikigai, 
but they don’t take it too seriously. They are relaxed and enjoy all that 
they do. 

■ They are very proud of their traditions and local culture. 

■ They are passionate about everything they do, however insignificant it 
might seem. 

■ Locals have a strong sense of yuimaaru —recognizing the connection 
between people. They help each other with everything from work in the 
fields (harvesting sugarcane or planting rice) to building houses and 
municipal projects. Our friend Miyagi, who ate dinner with us on our 
last night in town, told us that he was building a new home with the help 
of all his friends, and that we could stay there the next time we were in 
Ogimi. 

■ They are always busy, but they occupy themselves with tasks that allow 
them to relax. We didn’t see a single old grandpa sitting on a bench 
doing nothing. They’re always coming and going—to sing karaoke, visit 
with neighbors, or play a game of gateball. 





THE IKIGAI DIET 

What the world’s longest-living 
people eat and drink 



according to the World Health Organization, Japan has the highest life expectancy in the world: 85 years for 
men and 87.3 years for women. Moreover, it has the highest ratio of centenarians in the world: more than 
520 for every million people (as of September 2016). 


LIFE EXPECTANCY IN THE COUNTRIES 
WHERE PEOPLE LIVE THE LONGEST, 
COMPARED TO THE UNITED STATES 


Life 

expectancy 

(L.E.) 


O Okinawa 
O Japan 
O Sweden 
© USA 


© 



1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 


Source: World Health Organization, 1966; Japanese Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare, 2004; U.S. 

Department of Health and Human Services/CDC, 2005 

The above graphic, which compares life expectancy in Japan, its province 
Okinawa, Sweden, and the United States, shows that, while life expectancy in 
Japan is high overall, Okinawa exceeds the national average. 

Okinawa is one of the areas in Japan that were most affected by World War II. 
As a result not only of conflicts on the battlefield but also of hunger and a lack of 
resources once the war ended, the average life expectancy was not very high 
during the 1940s and 1950s. As Okinawans recovered from the destruction, 
however, they came to be some of the country’s longest-living citizens. 

What QPprpfQ tn Inna lifp Hn thp Tnnnnpcp hrdrl? What i« it ahrmt Okinawa that 



T T 11UI ID AV LI (_/ V7 V_» l \_/l\AllU»* W L ft A LI L 


T T AAUL L7WA VLL&gt; LV AV/AA^ AAA V V*V/ LAAV «A LI|DH11VDV XAVAV* • 

makes it the best of the best in terms of life expectancy? 

Experts point out that, for one thing, Okinawa is the only province in Japan 
without trains. Its residents have to walk or cycle when not driving. It is also the 
only province that has managed to follow the Japanese government’s 
recommendation of eating less than ten grams of salt per day. 


Okinawa’s miracle diet 

The mortality rate from cardiovascular disease in Okinawa is the lowest in Japan, 
and diet almost certainly has a lot to do with this. It is no coincidence that the 
“Okinawa Diet” is so often discussed around the world at panels on nutrition. 

The most concrete and widely cited data on diet in Okinawa come from 
studies by Makoto Suzuki, a cardiologist at the University of the Ryukyus, who 
has published more than seven hundred scientific articles on nutrition and aging 
in Okinawa since 1970. 

Bradley J. Willcox and D. Craig Willcox joined Makoto Suzuki’s research 
team and published a book considered the bible on the subject, The Okinawa 
Program.- They reached the following conclusions: 

■ Locals eat a wide variety of foods, especially vegetables. Variety seems to be 
key. A study of Okinawa’s centenarians showed that they ate 206 different 
foods, including spices, on a regular basis. They ate an average of eighteen 
different foods each day, a striking contrast to the nutritional poverty of our 
fast-food culture. 

■ They eat at least five servings of fruits and vegetables every day. At least 
seven types of fruits and vegetables are consumed by Okinawans on a daily 
basis. The easiest way to check if there is enough variety on your table is to 
make sure you’re “eating the rainbow.” A table featuring red peppers, 
carrots, spinach, cauliflower, and eggplant, for example, offers great color 
and variety. Vegetables, potatoes, legumes, and soy products such as tofu are 
the staples of an Okinawan’s diet. More than 30 percent of their daily 
calories comes from vegetables. 

■ Grains are the foundation of their diet. Japanese people eat white rice every 
day, sometimes adding noodles. Rice is the primary food in Okinawa, as 
well. 


■ They rarely eat sugar, and if they do, it’s cane sugar. We drove through 
several sugarcane fields every morning on our way to Ogimi, and even drank 
a glass of cane juice at Nakijin Castle. Beside the stall selling the juice was a 
sign describing the anticarcinogenic benefits of sugarcane. 

In addition to these basic dietary principles, Okinawans eat fish an average of 
three times per week; unlike in other parts of Japan, the most frequently 
consumed meat is pork, though locals eat it only once or twice per week. 

Along these line
s, Makoto Suzuki’s studies indicate the following: 

■ Okinawans consume, in general, one-third as much sugar as the rest of 
Japan’s population, which means that sweets and chocolate are much less a 
part of their diet. 

■ They also eat practically half as much salt as the rest of Japan: 7 grams per 
day, compared to an average of 12. 

■ They consume fewer calories: an average of 1,785 per day, compared to 
2,068 in the rest of Japan. In fact, low caloric intake is common among the 
five Blue Zones. 


Hara hachi bu 

This brings us back to the 80 percent rule we mentioned in the first chapter, a 
concept known in Japanese as hara hachi bu. It’s easy to do: When you notice 
you’re almost full but could have a little more ... just stop eating! 

One easy way to start applying the concept of hara hachi bu is to skip dessert. 
Or to reduce portion size. The idea is to still be a little bit hungry when you finish. 

This is why portion size tends to be much smaller in Japan than in the West. 
Food isn’t served as appetizers, main courses, and dessert. Instead, it’s much more 
common to see everything presented at once on small plates: one with rice, 
another with vegetables, a bowl of miso soup, and something to snack on. Serving 
food on many small plates makes it easier to avoid eating too much, and 
facilitates the varied diet discussed at the beginning of this chapter. 

Hara hachi bu is an ancient practice. The twelfth-century book on Zen 
Buddhism Zazen Youjinki recommends eating two-thirds as much as you might 
want to. Eating less than one might want is common among all Buddhist temples 


in the East. Perhaps Buddhism recognized the benefits of limiting caloric intake 
more than nine centuries ago. 


So, eat less to live longer? 

Few would challenge this idea. Without taking it to the extreme of malnutrition, 
of course, eating fewer calories than our bodies ask for seems to increase 
longevity. The key to staying healthy while consuming fewer calories is eating 
foods with a high nutritional value (especially “superfoods”) and avoiding those 
that add to our overall caloric intake but offer little to no nutritional value. 

The calorie restriction we’ve been discussing is one of the most effective ways 
to add years to your life. If the body regularly consumes enough, or too many, 
calories, it gets lethargic and starts to wear down, expending significant energy on 
digestion alone. 

Another benefit of calorie restriction is that it reduces levels of IGF-1 
(insulin-like growth factor 1) in the body. IGF-1 is a protein that plays a 
significant role in the aging process; it seems that one of the reasons humans and 
animals age is an excess of this protein in their blood.- 

Whether calorie restriction will extend lifespan in humans is not yet known, 
but data increasingly indicate that moderate calorie restriction with adequate 
nutrition has a powerful protective effect against obesity, type 2 diabetes, 
inflammation, hypertension, and cardiovascular disease and reduces metabolic 
risk factors associated with cancer.- 

An alternative to following the 80 percent rule on a daily basis is to fast for 
one or two days each week. The 5:2 (or fasting) diet recommends two days of 
fasting (consuming fewer than five hundred calories) every week and eating 
normally on the other five days. 

Among its many benefits, fasting helps cleanse the digestive system and allows 
it to rest. 


15 natural antioxidants found in the Okinawan diet 

Antioxidants are molecules that slow the oxidation process in cells, neutralizing 
the free radicals that cause damage and accelerate aging. The antioxidant power 
of green tea, for example, is well known, and will be discussed later at greater 


ICIiglll. 

Because they are rich in antioxidants and are eaten nearly every day in the 
region, these fifteen foods are considered keys to Okinawan vitality: 

■ Tofu 

■ Miso 

■ Tuna 

■ Carrots 

■ Goya (bitter melon) 

■ Kombu (sea kelp) 

■ Cabbage 

■ Nori (seaweed) 

■ Onion 

■ Soy sprouts 

■ Hechima (cucumber-like gourd) 

■ Soybeans (boiled or raw) 

■ Sweet potato 

■ Peppers 

■ Sanpin-cha (jasmine tea) 


Sanpin-cha: The reigning infusion in Okinawa 

Okinawans drink more Sanpin-cha—a mix of green tea and jasmine flowers— 
than any other kind of tea. The closest approximation in the West would be the 
jasmine tea that usually comes from China. A 1988 study conducted by Hiroko 
Sho at the Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology indicates that jasmine 
tea reduces blood cholesterol levels.- 

Sanpin-cha can be found in many different forms in Okinawa, and is even 
available in vending machines. In addition to all the antioxidant benefits of green 
tea, it boasts the benefits of jasmine, which include: 

■ Reducing the risk of heart attack 

■ Strengthening the immune system 

■ Helping relieve stress 

■ Lowering cholesterol 


nr; nou/om’ Hrinlv on QA7ArortA r\f t\-\ 1*AA nunc r\f Q nrmin nK a a\ rAt-x t 





wxvxixcivvcino xxx xixiv cm ci v v^x cig,v^ v/x nixv^upo ux vjcixxpxxx _ \^xxci v^v^x y vxci y. 

It might be hard to find exactly the same blend in the West, but we can drink 
jasmine tea, or even a high-quality green tea, instead. 


The secrets of green tea 

Green tea has been credited for centuries with significant medicinal properties. 
Recent studies have confirmed its many benefits, and have attested to the 
importance of this ancient plant in the longevity of those who drink it often. 

Originally from China, where it has been consumed for millennia, green tea 
didn’t make its way to the rest of the world until just a few centuries ago. Unlike 
other teas, and as a result of being air-dried without fermentation, it retains its 
active elements even after being dried and crumbled. It offers meaningful health 
benefits such as: 

■ Controlling cholesterol 

■ Lowering blood sugar levels 

■ Improving circulation 

■ Protection against the flu (vitamin C) 

■ Promoting bone health (fluoride) 

■ Protection against certain bacterial infections 

■ Protection against UV damage 

■ Cleansing and diuretic effects 

White tea, with its high concentration of polyphenols, may be even more 
effective against aging. In fact, it is considered to be the natural product with the 
greatest antioxidant power in the world—to the extent that one cup of white tea 
might pack the same punch as about a dozen glasses of orange juice. 

In summary: Drinking green or white tea every day can help us reduce the free 
radicals in our bodies, keeping us young longer. 


The powerful shikuwasa 

Shikuwasa is the citrus fruit par excellence of Okinawa, and Ogimi is its largest 
producer in all of Japan. 


The fruit is extremely acidic: It is impossible to drink shikuwasa juice without 
diluting it first with water. Its taste is somewhere between that of a lime and a 
mandarin orange, to which it bears a family resemblance. 

Shikuwasas also contain high levels of nobiletin, a flavonoid rich in 
antioxidants. 

All citrus fruits—grapefruits, oranges, lemons—are high in nobiletin, but 
Okinawa’s shikuwasas have forty times as much as oranges. Consuming nobiletin 
has been proven to protect us from arteriosclerosis, cancer, type 2 diabetes, and 
obesity in general. 

Shikuwasas also contain vitamins C and Bj, beta carotene, and minerals. They 

are used in many traditional dishes and to add flavor to food, and are squeezed to 
make juice. While conducting research at the birthday parties of the town’s 
“grandparents,” we were served shikuwasa cake. 


The Antioxidant Canon, for Westerners 

In 2010 the UK’s Daily Mirror published a list of foods recommended by 

experts to combat aging. Among these foods readily available in the West 

are: 

■ Vegetables such as broccoli and chard, for their high concentration of 
water, minerals, and fiber 

■ Oily fish such as salmon, mackerel, tuna, and sardines, for all the 
antioxidants in their fat 

■ Fruits such as citrus, strawberries, and apricots; they are an excellent 
source of vitamins and help eliminate toxins from the body 

■ Berries such as blueberries and goji berries; they are rich in 
phytochemical antioxidants 

■ Dried fruits, which contain vitamins and antioxidants, and give you 
energy 

■ Grains such as oats and wheat, which give you energy and contain 
minerals 

■ Olive oil, for its antioxidant effects that show in your skin 

■ Red wine, in moderation, for its antioxidant and vasodilatory properties 

Foods that should be eliminated are refined sugar and grains, processed 

baked goods, and prepared foods, along with cow’s milk and all its 

a :— 4-i T7~ii : a: u , r i __j _ 




uerivauves. ronowmg mis uiei win neip you reel younger ana siow me 

process of premature aging. 



VIII 


GENTLE MOVEMENTS, LONGER LIFE 

Exercises from the East that 
promote health and longevity 



studies from the Blue Zones suggest that the people who live longest are not the ones who do the most exercise 
but rather the ones who move the most. 

When we visited Ogimi, the Village of Longevity, we discovered that even 
people over eighty and ninety years old are still highly active. They don’t stay at 
home looking out the window or reading the newspaper. Ogimi’s residents walk a 
lot, do karaoke with their neighbors, get up early in the morning, and, as soon as 
they’ve had breakfast—or even before—head outside to weed their gardens. They 
don’t go to the gym or exercise intensely, but they almost never stop moving in 
the course of their daily routines. 


As Easy as Getting out of Your Chair 

“Metabolism slows down 90 percent after 30 minutes of sitting. The 
enzymes that move the bad fat from your arteries to your muscles, where 
it can get burned off, slow down. And after two hours, good cholesterol 
drops 20 percent. Just getting up for five minutes is going to get things 
going again. These things are so simple they’re almost stupid,” says Gavin 
Bradley 1 - in a 2015 interview with Brigid Schulte for the Washington Post.- 
Bradley is one of the preeminent experts on the subject, and the director 
of an international organization dedicated to building awareness of how 
detrimental sitting all the time can be to our health. 


If we live in a city, we might find it hard to move in natural and healthy ways 
every day, but we can turn to exercises that have proven for centuries to be good 
for the body. 

The Eastern disciplines for bringing body, mind, and soul into balance have 
become quite popular in the West, but in their countries of origin they have been 
used for ages to promote health. 

Yoga—originally from India, though very popular in Japan—and China’s 
qigong and tai chi, among other disciplines, seek to create harmony between a 
person’s body and mind so they can face the world with strength, joy, and 
serenity. 



nicy cue LUUICU Uf&gt; CilAlif) ui yuum, CU1U 5&gt;C1C11CC ll£lJ&gt; CllLlUi5&gt;CU LUC C1CU111. 

These gentle exercises offer extraordinary health benefits, and are particularly 
appropriate for older individuals who have a harder time staying fit. 

Tai chi has been shown, among other things, to slow the development of 
osteoporosis and Parkinson’s disease, to increase circulation, and to improve 
muscle tone and flexibility. Its emotional benefits are just as important: It is a 
great shield against stress and depression. 

You don’t need to go to the gym for an hour every day or run marathons. As 
Japanese centenarians show us, all you need is to add movement to your day. 
Practicing any of these Eastern disciplines on a regular basis is a great way to do 
so. An added benefit is that they all have well-defined steps, and as we saw in 
chapter IV, disciplines with clear rules are good for flow. If you don’t like any of 
these disciplines, feel free to choose a practice that you love and that makes you 
move. 

In the following pages we’ll take a look at some of the practices that promote 
health and longevity—but first, a little appetizer: a singularly Japanese exercise 
for starting your day. 


Radio taiso 

This morning warm-up has been around since before World War II. The “radio” 
part of its name is from when the instructions for each exercise were transmitted 
over the radio, but today people usually do these movements while tuned to a 
television channel or Internet video demonstrating the steps. 

One of the main purposes of doing radio taiso is to promote a spirit of unity 
among participants. The exercises are always done in groups, usually in schools 
before the start of classes, and in businesses before the workday begins. 

Statistics show that 30 percent of Japanese practice radio taiso for a few 
minutes every morning, but radio taiso is one thing that almost everyone we 
interviewed in Ogimi had in common. Even the residents of the nursing home we 
visited dedicated at least five minutes every day to it, though some did the 
exercises from their wheelchairs. We joined them on their daily practice and we 
felt refreshed for the rest of the day. 

When these exercises are done in a group, it is usually on a sports field or in a 
large reception hall, and typically involves some kind of loudspeaker. 

The exercises take five or ten minutes, depending on whether you do all or 
only some of them. They focus on dynamic stretching and increasing joint 


mobility. One of the most iconic radio taiso exercises consists of simply raising 
your arms above your head and then bringing them down in a circular motion. It 
is a tool to wake up the body, an easy mobility workout that is low in intensity 
and that focuses on exercising as many joints as possible. 

It might seem basic, but in our modern lives, we can spend days without 
raising our arms above our ears. Think about it: our arms are down when using 
computers, when using smartphones, when reading books. One of the few times 
we raise our hands over our heads is when reaching for something in a cupboard 
or closet, while our ancestors were raising their hands over their heads all the 
time when gathering things from trees. Radio taiso helps us to practice all the 
basic movements of the body. 



Basic version of the radio taiso exercises (5 minutes). 







Yoga 

Popular in Japan as well as in the West, yoga can be done by almost anyone. 

Some of its poses have even been adapted for pregnant women and practitioners 
with physical disabilities. 

Yoga comes from India, where it was developed millennia ago to unite our 
mental and physical elements. The word yoga itself comes from the Sanskrit term 
for “yoke,” which refers to the crosspiece that binds draft animals to one another 
and to the cart they’re pulling. Yoga strives to unite body and mind in the same 
way, guiding us toward a healthy lifestyle in harmony with the world around us. 
The main objectives of yoga are: 

■ To bring us closer to our (human) nature 

■ Mental and physical purification 

■ To bring us closer to the divine 

Styles of yoga 

Though all are oriented toward similar goals, there are many different types of 
yoga that vary according to the traditions and texts from which they were 
developed. The differences among them lie, as the masters say, in the path taken 
to the summit of our best self. 

■ Jnana yoga : the yoga of wisdom; the search for discipline and mental 
growth 

■ Karma yoga : focuses on action, on tasks and duties that benefit oneself and 
one’s community 

■ Bhakti yoga : the yoga of devotion and surrender to the divine 

■ Mantra yoga : focuses on the recitation of mantras to reach a state of 
relaxation 

■ Kundalini yoga : combines diverse steps to reach the desired mental state 

■ Raja yoga: also known as the royal path; encompasses a range of steps 
geared toward achieving communion with oneself and others 

■ Hatha yoga: the most widespread form in the West and Japan; characterized 
by asanas or poses combined in a quest for balance 


How to do a Sun Salutation 


The Sun Salutation is one of the most iconic exercises in hatha yoga. To do it, you 

simply have to follow these twelve basic movements: 

1. With your feet together, stand up straight but keep your muscles relaxed. 
Exhale. 

2. Place the palms of your hands together in front of your chest; from this 
position, inhale as you raise your arms above your head and bend backward 
slightly. 

3. Exhale as you bend forward until you touch the ground with the palms of 
your hands, without bending your knees. 

4. Stretch one leg back to touch the floor with the tips of your toes. Inhale. 

5. Bring the other leg back, keeping your legs and arms straight, as you hold 
your breath. 

6. As you exhale, bend your arms and bring your chest to the ground and then 
forward, resting your knees on the ground. 

7. Straighten your arms and bend your spine back, keeping the lower half of 
your body on the ground. Inhale. 

8. With your hands and feet on the ground, lift your hips until your arms and 
legs are straight and your body forms an upside-down V. Exhale throughout 
the movement. 

9. Bring forward the same leg you’d stretched back earlier and bend it so that 
your knee and foot are aligned under your head and between your hands. 
Inhale. 

10. Exhale as you bring your back foot forward and straighten your legs, keeping 
your hands on the ground as in posture 3. 

11. Bring your arms above your head with your palms together and bend 
backward slightly, as you did in posture 2, while you inhale. 

12. Lower your arms to their initial position in mountain pose while you exhale. 

You’ve just greeted the sun; now you’re ready to have a fantastic day. 








Exhale 


Inhale 



Tai chi 

Also known as t’ai chi ch’uan (or taijiquan), tai chi is a Chinese martial art that 
can be traced back hundreds of years to Buddhism and Confucianism; it is very 
popular in Japan, too. 

According to Chinese tradition, it was created by the Taoist master and martial 
arts practitioner Zhang Sanfeng, though it was Yang Luchan who in the 
nineteenth century brought the form to the rest of the world. 





Tai chi was originally a neijia, or internal martial art, meaning its goal was 
personal growth. Focused on self-defense, it teaches those who practice it to 
defeat their adversaries by using the least amount of force possible and by relying 
on agility. 

Tai chi, which was also seen as a means of healing body and mind, would go 
on to be used more frequently to foster health and inner peace. To encourage its 
citizens to be more active, the Chinese government promoted it as an exercise, 
and it lost its original connection to martial arts, becoming instead a source of 
health and well-being accessible to all. 

Styles of tai chi 

There are different schools and styles of tai chi. The following are the best 
known: 

■ Chen-style : alternates between slow movements and explosive ones 

■ Yang-style : the most widespread of the forms; characterized by slow, fluid 
movements 

■ Wu-style : utilizes small, slow, deliberate movements 

■ Hao-style : centered on internal movements, with almost microscopic 
external movements; one of the least practiced forms of tai chi, even in 
China 

Despite their differences, these styles all have the same objectives: 

1. To control movement through stillness 

2. To overcome force through finesse 

3. To move second and arrive first 

4. To know yourself and your opponent 

The ten basic principles of tai chi 

According to the master Yang Chengfu, the correct practice of tai chi follows ten 
basic principles: 


1. Elevate the crown of your head, and focus all your energy there. 

2. Tighten your chest and expand your back to lighten your lower body. 



3. Relax your waist and let it guide your body. 

4. Learn to differentiate between heaviness and lightness, knowing how your 
weight is distributed. 

5. Relax the shoulders to allow free movement of the arms and promote the 
flow of energy. 

6. Value the agility of the mind over the strength of the body. 

7. Unify the upper and lower body so they act in concert. 

8. Unify the internal and the external to synchronize mind, body, and breath. 

9. Do not break the flow of your movement; maintain fluidity and harmony. 

10. Look for stillness in movement. An active body leads to a calm mind. 

Imitating clouds 

One of the best-known movements in tai chi consists of following the form of 
clouds in an exercise called Wave Hands Like Clouds. Here are the steps: 

1. Extend your arms in front of you with your palms down. 

2. Turn your palms to face in, as though you were hugging a tree trunk. 

3. Open your arms out to the side. 

4. Bring the left arm up and center, and the right arm down and center. 

5. Trace the shape of a ball in front of your body. 

6. Turn your left palm toward your face. 

7. Shift your weight to your left foot and pivot from your hip toward that side, 
while your eyes follow the movement of your hand. 

8. Bring your left hand to your waist and your right hand in front of your face. 

9. Shift your weight to your right foot. 

10. Pivot toward your right, looking at your raised right hand the entire time. 

11. Repeat this movement fluidly, shifting your weight from one foot to the 
other as you reposition your hands. 

12. Stretch your arms out in front of you again and bring them down slowly, 
returning to your initial position. 




Qigong 

Also known as chi kung, its name combines qi (life force, or energy) and gong 
(work), indicating that the form works with the individual’s life force. Though 
relatively modern, especially under its current name, the art of qigong is based on 
the Tao yin, an ancient art meant to foster mental and physical well-being. 

The practice began to appear in reports on training and martial arts at the 
beginning of the twentieth century, and by the 1930s was being used in hospitals. 
The Chinese government later popularized it, as it had done with tai chi. 

Qigong involves static and dynamic physical exercises that stimulate 
respiration in a standing, seated, or reclined position. There are many different 
styles of qigong, but all of them seek to strengthen and regenerate qi. Though its 
movements are typically gentle, the practice is intense. 

Benefits of qigong 

According to numerous international scientific studies, qigong—like tai chi and 
yoga—offers significant health benefits. The following stand out among those 




















































proven through scientific research, as observed by Dr. Kenneth M. Sancier of San 
Francisco’s Qigong Institute in his article “Medical Applications of Qigong”-: 

■ Modification of brain waves 

■ Improved balance of sex hormones 

■ Lower mortality rate from heart attacks 

■ Lower blood pressure in patients with hypertension 

■ Greater bone density 

■ Better circulation 

■ Deceleration of symptoms associated with senility 

■ Greater balance and efficiency of bodily functions 

■ Increased blood flow to the brain and greater mind-body connection 

■ Improved cardiac function 

■ Reduction in the secondary effects of cancer treatments 

Practicing these arts not only keeps us in shape, it also helps extend our lives. 

Methods for practicing qigong 

In order to practice qigong correctly, we should remember that our life energy 
flows through our whole body. We should know how to regulate its many parts: 

1. Tyau Shenn: (regulating the body) by adopting the correct posture—it is 
important to be firmly rooted to the ground 

2. Tyau Shyi : (regulating the breath) until it is calm, steady, and peaceful 

3. Tyau Hsin : (regulating the mind); the most complicated part, as it implies 
emptying the mind of thoughts 

4. Tyau Chi : (regulating the life force) through the regulation of the three prior 
elements, so that it flows naturally 

5. Tyau Shen: (regulating the spirit); the spirit is both strength and root in battle, 
as Yang Jwing-Ming explains in The Essence of Taiji Qigong. - 

In this way, the whole organism will be prepared to work together toward a 
single goal. 


The five elements of qigong 



Une ot qigong s best-known exercises is a series representing the live elements: 
earth, water, wood, metal, and fire. This series of movements seeks to balance the 
five currents of energy in order to improve brain and organ function. 

There are several ways to do these movements. In this case, we’re following 
the model of Professor Maria Isabel Garda Monreal from the Qigong Institute in 
Barcelona. 

EARTH 

1. Stand with your legs apart and your feet directly below your shoulders. 

2. Turn your feet outward slightly to strengthen the posture. 

3. Keep your shoulders relaxed and down and your arms loose at your sides, 
slightly away from your body (this is the Wu Qi, or rooted, posture). 

4. As you inhale, raise your arms in front of you until your hands are level with 
your shoulders, your palms facing down. 

5. Exhale as you bend your knees and bring your arms down until your hands 
are level with your stomach, your palms facing in. 

6. Hold this position for a few seconds, focusing on your breath. 



0 0 



WATER 



1. Starting from Earth posture, bend your knees into a squat, keeping your chest 
upright and exhaling throughout. 

2. Press your coccyx downward to stretch your lumbar spine. 

3. As you inhale, stand to return to Earth posture. 

4. 4. Repeat twice, for a total of three. 



WOOD 

1. Starting from Earth posture, turn your palms upward and open your arms to 
the side, forming a circle as you inhale, until your hands are level with your 
clavicle. Turn your hands so that your palms and elbows point downward, 
while keeping your shoulders relaxed. 

2. Reverse the movement as you exhale, making a downward circle with your 
arms until you reach your initial position. 

3. Repeat twice, for a total of three. 




METAL 

1. Starting from Earth posture, raise your arms until your hands are level with 
your sternum. 

2. Turn your palms toward each other, about four inches apart, with your 
fingers relaxed and slightly separated, pointing upward. 

3. As you inhale, move your hands away from each other until they are shoulder 
width apart. 

4. As you exhale, bring your hands toward each other until they are back in 
position 2. 

5. Repeat twice, for a total of three, observing the concentration of energy as 
you bring your hands together in front of your lungs. 






FIRE 

1. Starting from Earth posture, bring your hands level with your heart as you 
inhale, with one hand slightly above the other and your palms facing each 
other. 

2. Rotate your hands to feel the energy of your heart. 

3. Turn from your waist gently to the left, keeping your torso relaxed and your 
forearms parallel to the ground. 

4. With your palms still facing each other, separate your hands, bringing one up 
until it is level with your shoulder, and the other down in front of your 
abdomen. 

5. Turn from your waist gently to the right, keeping your torso relaxed and your 
forearms parallel to the ground. 

6. As you exhale, let your hands come back together in front of your heart. 

7. With your palms still facing each other, separate your hands, bringing one up 
until it is level with your shoulder, and the other down in front of your 
abdomen. 




COMPLETING THE SERIES 


1. Starting from Earth posture, inhale as you bring your hands level with your 
shoulders, palms facing down. 

2. As you exhale, lower your arms to rest at your sides, returning to the initial 
Wu Qi posture. 



Shiatsu 



































Created in Japan in the early twentieth century, principally for the treatment of 
arthritis, shiatsu also works on energy flow through the application of pressure 
with the thumbs and the palms of the hands. In combination with stretching and 
breathing exercises, it seeks to create equilibrium among the different elements 
of the body. 

It is not important that a Tao Yin* have a name, is imitating something, or is 
engraved in jade. What is important is the technique and the essence of 
what is really practiced. Stretching and contracting, bending and lifting of 
the head, stepping, lying down, resting or standing, walking or stepping 
slowly, screaming or breathing—everything can be a Tao Yin. 

—Ge Hong- 


Breathe better, live longer 

The book Xiuzhen shishu, known in the West as Ten Books on the Cultivation of 
Perfection, dates back to the thirteenth century and is a compendium of materials 
from diverse sources on developing the mind and body. 

It quotes, among others, the celebrated Chinese doctor and essayist Sun 
Simiao, who lived during the sixth century. Sun Simiao was a proponent of a 
technique called the Six Healing Sounds, which involves the coordination of 
movement, breathing, and pronouncing sounds with the purpose of bringing our 
souls to a place of calm. 

The six sounds are: 

Xu, pronounced like “shh” with a deep sigh, which is associated with the liver 
He, pronounced like “her” with a yawn, which is associated with the heart 
Si, pronounced like “sir” with a slow exhale, which is associated with the lungs 
Chui, pronounced like “chwee” with a forceful exhale, which is associated 
with the kidneys 

Hoo, pronounced like “who,” which is associated with the spleen 
Xi, pronounced like “she, ” which connects the whole body 

The following poem by Sun Simiao offers clues about how to live well 
according to the season. It reminds us of the importance of breathing, and 


suggests that as we breathe, we visualize the organs associated with each of the 
healing sounds. 


In spring, breathe xu for clear eyes and so wood can aid your liver. 

In summer, reach for he, so that heart and fire can be at peace. 

In fall, breathe si to stabilize and gather metal, keeping the lungs moist. 

For the kidneys, next, breathe chui and see your inner waters calm. 

The Triple Heater needs your xi to expel all heat and troubles. 

In all four seasons, take deep breaths so your spleen can process food. 

And, of course, avoid exhaling noisily; don’t let even your own ears hear you. 

The practice is most excellent and will help preserve your divine elixir. 

It might feel confusing to be presented with all the Eastern traditions we have 
introduced in this chapter. The takeaway is that they all combine a physical 
exercise with an awareness of our breath. These two components—movement 
and breath—help us to bring our consciousness in line with our body, instead of 
allowing our mind to be carried away by the sea of daily worries. Most of the 
time, we are just not aware enough of our breathing. 




RESILIENCE AND WABI-SABI 

How to face life’s challenges 
without letting stress and worry age 
you 



What is resilience? 


One thing that everyone with a clearly defined ikigai has in common is that they 
pursue their passion no matter what. They never give up, even when the cards 
seem stacked against them or they face one hurdle after another. 

We’re talking about resilience, a concept that has become influential among 
psychologists. 

But resilience isn’t just the ability to persevere. As we’ll see in this chapter, it 
is also an outlook we can cultivate to stay focused on the important things in life 
rather than what is most urgent, and to keep ourselves from being carried away by 
negative emotions. 

In the final section of the chapter, we’ll explore techniques that go beyond 
resilience to cultivate antifragility. 

Sooner or later, we all have to face difficult moments, and the way we do this 
can make a huge difference to our quality of life. Proper training for our mind, 
body, and emotional resilience is essential for confronting life’s ups and downs. 


Nana korobi ya oki "tlzilf 
Fall seven times, rise eight. 

—Japanese proverb 

Resilience is our ability to deal with setbacks. The more resilient we are, the 
easier it will be to pick ourselves up and get back to what gives meaning to our 
lives. 

Resilient people know how to stay focused on their objectives, on what 
matters, without giving in to discouragement. Their flexibility is the source of 
their strength: They know how to adapt to change and to reversals of fortune. 
They concentrate on the things they can control and don’t worry about those they 
can’t. 

In the words of the famous Serenity Prayer by Reinhold Niebuhr: 


God, give us grace to accept with serenity 
the things that cannot be changed, 
Courage to change the things 
which should be changed, 
and the Wisdom to distinguish 


the one from the other. 


Emotional resilience through Buddhism and Stoicism 

Siddhartha Gautama (Buddha) was born a prince of Kapilavastu, Nepal, and grew 
up in a palace, surrounded by riches. At sixteen he married and had a child. 

Not satisfied by his family’s wealth, at twenty-nine he decided to try a 
different lifestyle and ran away from the palace to live as an ascetic. But it wasn’t 
asceticism that he was looking for; it didn’t offer the happiness and well-being he 
sought. Neither wealth nor extreme asceticism worked for him. He realized that a 
wise person should not ignore life’s pleasures. A wise person can live with these 
pleasures but should always remain conscious of how easy it is to be enslaved by 
them. 

Zeno of Citium began his studies with the Cynics. The Cynics also led ascetic 
lives, leaving behind all earthly pleasures. They lived in the street, and the only 
thing they owned was the clothing on their backs. 

Seeing that Cynicism did not give him a sense of well-being, Zeno abandoned 
its teachings to found the school of Stoicism, which centers on the idea that there 
is nothing wrong with enjoying life’s pleasures as long as they do not take control 
of your life as you enjoy them. You have to be prepared for those pleasures to 
disappear. 

The goal is not to eliminate all feelings and pleasures from our lives, as in 
Cynicism, but to eliminate negative emotions. 

Since their inception, one of the objectives of both Buddhism and Stoicism 
has been to control pleasure, emotions, and desires. Though the philosophies are 
very different, both aim to curb our ego and control our negative emotions. 

Both Stoicism and Buddhism are, at their roots, methods for practicing well¬ 
being. 

According to Stoicism, our pleasures and desires are not the problem. We can 
enjoy them as long as they don’t take control of us. The Stoics viewed those who 
were able to control their emotions as virtuous. 


What’s the worst thing that could happen? 

We finally land our dream job, but after a little while we are already hunting for a 
better one. We win the lottery and buy a nice car but then decide we can’t live 


without a sailboat. We finally win the heart of the man or woman we’ve been 
pining for and suddenly find we have a wandering eye. 

People can be insatiable. 

The Stoics believed that these kinds of desires and ambitions are not worth 
pursuing. The objective of the virtuous person is to reach a state of tranquility 
(apatheia): the absence of negative feelings such as anxiety, fear, shame, vanity, 
and anger, and the presence of positive feelings such as happiness, love, serenity, 
and gratitude. 

In order to keep their minds virtuous, the Stoics practiced something like 
negative visualization: They imagined the worst thing that could happen in order 
to be prepared if certain privileges and pleasures were taken from them. 

To practice negative visualization, we have to reflect on negative events, but 
without worrying about them. 

Seneca, one of the richest men in ancient Rome, lived a life of luxury but was, 
nonetheless, an active Stoic. He recommended practicing negative visualization 
every night before falling asleep. In fact, he not only imagined these negative 
situations, he actually put them into practice—for example, by living for a week 
without servants, or the food and drink he was used to as a wealthy man. As a 
result, he was able to answer the question “What’s the worst thing that could 
happen?” 


Meditating for healthier emotions 

In addition to negative visualization and not giving in to negative emotions, 
another central tenet of Stoicism is knowing what we can control and what we 
can’t , as we see in the Serenity Prayer. 

Worrying about things that are beyond our control accomplishes nothing. We 
should have a clear sense of what we can change and what we can’t, which in turn 
will allow us to resist giving in to negative emotions. 

In the words of Epictetus, “It’s not what happens to you, but how you react that 
matter s.”- 

In Zen Buddhism, meditation is a way to become aware of our desires and 
emotions and thereby free ourselves from them. It is not simply a question of 
keeping the mind free of thoughts but instead involves observing our thoughts 
and emotions as they appear, without getting carried away by them. In this way, 
we train our minds not to get swept up in anger, jealousy, or resentment. 


One of the most commonly used mantras in Buddhism focuses on controlling 
negative emotions: “Om mani padme hum in which om is the generosity that 
purifies the ego, ma is the ethics that purifies jealousy, ni is the patience that 
purifies passion and desire, pad is the precision that purifies bias, me is the 
surrender that purifies greed, and hum is the wisdom that purifies hatred. 


The here and now, and the impermanence of things 

Another key to cultivating resilience is knowing in which time to live. Both 
Buddhism and Stoicism remind us that the present is all that exists, and it is the 
only thing we can control. Instead of worrying about the past or the future, we 
should appreciate things just as they are in the moment, in the now. 

“The only moment in which you can be truly alive is the present moment,” 
observes the Buddhist monk Thich Nhat Hanh. 

In addition to living in the here and now, the Stoics recommend reflecting on 
the impermanence of the things around us. 

The Roman emperor Marcus Aurelius said that the things we love are like the 
leaves of a tree: They can fall at any moment with a gust of wind. He also said 
that changes in the world around us are not accidental but rather form part of the 
essence of the universe—a rather Buddhist notion, in fact. 

We should never forget that everything we have and all the people we love will 
disappear at some point. This is something we should keep in mind, but without 
giving in to pessimism. Being aware of the impermanence of things does not have 
to make us sad; it should help us love the present moment and those who 
surround us. 

“All things human are short-lived and perishable,” Seneca tells us.= 

The temporary, ephemeral, and impermanent nature of the world is central to 
every Buddhist discipline. Keeping this always in mind helps us avoid excessive 
pain in times of loss. 


Wabi-sabi and ichi-go ichi-e 

Wabi-sabi is a Japanese concept that shows us the beauty of the fleeting, 
changeable, and imperfect nature of the world around us. Instead of searching for 
beauty in perfection, we should look for it in things that are flawed, incomplete. 

t u ic ic vxzfvtr TononACA nlopp ci 1 r&gt;\~\ rmliiA fr\r AvomnlA r\n on i rromil o r rvr 


JL JLJLJLO lO VV11J LJLJLV^ J CipClllL/O piClV^V^ OULU VCllUA^, IUI V^TVClllipiV^, Wll Clll 11 1LilCll UI 

cracked teacup. Only things that are imperfect, incomplete, and ephemeral can 
truly be beautiful, because only those things resemble the natural world. 

A complementary Japanese concept is that of ichi-go ichi-e, which could be 
translated as “This moment exists only now and won’t come again.” It is heard 
most often in social gatherings as a reminder that each encounter—whether with 
friends, family, or strangers—is unique and will never be repeated, meaning that 
we should enjoy the moment and not lose ourselves in worries about the past or 
the future. 

The concept is commonly used in tea ceremonies, Zen meditation, and 
Japanese martial arts, all of which place emphasis on being present in the 
moment. 

In the West, we’ve grown accustomed to the permanence of the stone 
buildings and cathedrals of Europe, which sometimes gives us the sense that 
nothing changes, making us forget about the passage of time. Greco-Roman 
architecture adores symmetry, sharp lines, imposing facades, and buildings and 
statues of the gods that outlast the centuries. 

Japanese architecture, on the other hand, doesn’t try to be imposing or perfect, 
because it is built in the spirit of wabi-sabi. The tradition of making structures out 
of wood presupposes their impermanence and the need for future generations to 
rebuild them. Japanese culture accepts the fleeting nature of the human being and 
everything we create. 

The Grand Shrine of Ise,- for example, has been rebuilt every twenty years for 
centuries. The most important thing is not to keep the building standing for 
generations, but to preserve customs and traditions—things that can withstand the 
passage of time better than structures made by human hands. 

The key is to accept that there are certain things over which we have no 
control, like the passage of time and the ephemeral nature of the world around us. 

Ichi-go ichi-e teaches us to focus on the present and enjoy each moment that 
life brings us. This is why it is so important to find and pursue our ikigai. 

Wabi-sabi teaches us to appreciate the beauty of imperfection as an 
opportunity for growth. 


Beyond resilience: Antifragility 

As the legend goes, the first time Hercules faced the Hydra, he despaired when 
he discovered that cutting off one of its heads meant that two would grow back in 


its place. He would never be able to kill the beast if it got stronger with every 
wound. 

As Nassim Nicholas Taleb explains in Antifragile: Things That Gain from 
Disorder,- we use the word fragile to describe people, things, and organizations 
that are weakened when harmed, and the words robust and resilient for things that 
are able to withstand harm without weakening, but we don’t have a word for 
things that get stronger when harmed (up to a point). 

To refer to the kind of power possessed by the Hydra of Lerna, to talk about 
things that get stronger when they are harmed, Taleb proposes the term 
antifragile: “Antifragility is beyond resilience or robustness. The resilient resists 
shocks and stays the same; the antifragile gets better.” 

Catastrophes and exceptional circumstances offer good models for explaining 
antifragility. In 2011 a tsunami hit the Tohoku region of Japan, doing tremendous 
damage to dozens of cities and towns along the coast, most famously Fukushima. 

When we visited the affected coast two years after the catastrophe, having 
driven for hours along cracked highways and past one empty gas station after 
another, we passed through several ghost towns whose streets had been taken over 
by the remnants of houses, piles of cars, and empty train stations. These towns 
were fragile spaces that had been forgotten by the government and could not 
recover on their own. 

Other places, such as Ishinomaki and Kesennuma, suffered extensive damage 
but were rebuilt within a few years, thanks to the efforts of many. Ishinomaki and 
Kesennuma showed how resilient they were in their ability to return to normal 
after the catastrophe. 

The earthquake that caused the tsunami also affected the Fukushima nuclear 
power plant. The Tokyo Electric Power Company engineers working at the plant 
were not prepared to recover from that kind of damage. The Fukushima nuclear 
facility is still in a state of emergency and will be for decades to come. It 
demonstrated its fragility in the face of an unprecedented catastrophe. 

The Japanese financial markets closed minutes after the earthquake. Which 
businesses did the best in the aftermath? Stock in big construction companies has 
been steadily on the rise since 2011; the need to rebuild the entire coast of 
Tohoku is a boon for construction. In this case, Japanese construction companies 
are antifragile, since they benefited enormously from the catastrophe. 

Now let’s take a look at how we can apply this concept to our daily lives. How 
can we be more antifragile? 


btep i: ureate reaunaancies 

Instead of having a single salary, try to find a way to make money from your 
hobbies, at other jobs, or by starting your own business. If you have only one 
salary, you might be left with nothing should your employer run into trouble, 
leaving you in a position of fragility. On the other hand, if you have several 
options and you lose your primary job, it might just happen that you end up 
dedicating more time to your secondary job, and maybe even make more money 
at it. You would have beaten that stroke of bad luck and would be, in that case, 
antifragile. 

One hundred percent of the seniors we interviewed in Ogimi had a primary 
and a secondary occupation. Most of them kept a vegetable garden as a secondary 
job, and sold their produce at the local market. 

The same idea goes for friendships and personal interests. It’s just a matter, as 
the saying goes, of not putting all your eggs in one basket. 

In the sphere of romantic relationships, there are those who focus all their 
energy on their partner and make him or her their whole world. Those people lose 
everything if the relationship doesn’t work out, whereas if they’ve cultivated 
strong friendships and a full life along the way, they’ll be in a better position to 
move on at the end of a relationship. They’ll be antifragile. 

Right now you might be thinking, “I don’t need more than one salary, and I’m 
happy with the friends I’ve always had. Why should I add anything new?” It might 
seem like a waste of time to add variation to our lives, because extraordinary 
things don’t ordinarily happen. We slip into a comfort zone. But the unexpected 
always happens, sooner or later. 

Step 2: Bet conservatively in certain areas and take many small 
risks in others 

The world of finance turns out to be very useful in explaining this concept. If you 
have $10,000 saved up, you might put $9,000 of that into an index fund or fixed- 
term deposit, and invest the remaining $1,000 in ten start-ups with huge growth 
potential—say, $100 in each. 

One possible scenario is that three of the companies fail (you lose $300), the 
value of three other companies goes down (you lose another $100 or $200), the 
value of three goes up (you make $100 or $200), and the value of one of the start¬ 
ups increases twenty-fold (you make nearly $2,000, or maybe even more). 

You still make money, even if three of the businesses go completely belly-up. 


The key to becoming antifragile is taking on small risks that might lead to 
great reward, without exposing ourselves to dangers that might sink us, such as 
investing $10,000 in a fund of questionable reputation that we saw advertised in 
the newspaper. 

Step 3: Get rid of the things that make you fragile 

We’re taking the negative route for this exercise. Ask yourself: What makes me 
fragile? Certain people, things, and habits generate losses for us and make us 
vulnerable. Who and what are they? 

When we make our New Year’s resolutions, we tend to emphasize adding new 
challenges to our lives. It’s great to have this kind of objective, but setting “good 
riddance” goals can have an even bigger impact. For example: 

■ Stop snacking between meals 

■ Eat sweets only once a week 

■ Gradually pay off all debt 

■ Avoid spending time with toxic people 

■ Avoid spending time doing things we don’t enjoy, simply because we feel 
obligated to do them 

■ Spend no more than twenty minutes on Facebook per day 

To build resilience into our lives, we shouldn’t fear adversity, because each 
setback is an opportunity for growth. If we adopt an antifragile attitude, we’ll find 
a way to get stronger with every blow, refining our lifestyle and staying focused 
on our ikigai. 

Taking a hit or two can be viewed as either a misfortune or an experience that 
we can apply to all areas of our lives, as we continually make corrections and set 
new and better goals. As Taleb writes in Antifragile, “We need randomness, mess, 
adventures, uncertainty, self-discovery, hear traumatic episodes, all these things 
that make life worth living.” We encourage those interested in the concept of 
antifragility to read Nassim Nicholas Taleb’s Antifragile. 

Life is pure imperfection, as the philosophy of wabi-sabi teaches us, and the 
passage of time shows us that everything is fleeting, but if you have a clear sense 
of your ikigai, each moment will hold so many possibilities that it will seem 
almost like an eternity. 



EPILOGUE 


Ikigai : The art of living 


Mitsuo Aida was one of the most important calligraphers and haikuists of the 
twentieth century. He is yet another example of a Japanese person who dedicated 
his life to a very specific ikigai: communicating emotions with seventeen-syllable 
poems, using a shodo calligraphy brush. 

Many of Aida’s haikus philosophize about the importance of the present 
moment, and the passage of time. The poem reproduced below could be 
translated as “In the here and now, the only thing in my life is your life.” 

Ulk &lt;_ &lt;_ L U \ ^Otz. U 
CDlUDS^^/cCDlUDS 

In another poem, Aida writes simply, “Here, now.” It is an artwork that seeks 
to evoke feelings of mono no aware (a melancholy appreciation of the 
ephemeral). 


US 


The following poem touches on one of the secrets of bringing ikigai into our 
lives: “Happiness is always determined by your heart.” 




This last one, also by Aida, means “Keep going; don’t change your path.” 





Once you discover your ikigai, pursuing it and nurturing it every day will bring 
meaning to your life. The moment your life has this purpose, you will achieve a 
happy state of flow in all you do, like the calligrapher at his canvas or the chef 
who, after half a century, still prepares sushi for his patrons with love. 


Conclusion 

Our ikigai is different for all of us, but one thing we have in common is that we 
are all searching for meaning. When we spend our days feeling connected to what 
is meaningful to us, we live more fully; when we lose the connection, we feel 
despair. 

Modem life estranges us more and more from our true nature, making it very 
easy for us to lead lives lacking in meaning. Powerful forces and incentives 
(money, power, attention, success) distract us on a daily basis; don’t let them take 
over your life. 

Our intuition and curiosity are very powerful internal compasses to help us 
connect with our ikigai. Follow those things you enjoy, and get away from or 
change those you dislike. Be led by your curiosity, and keep busy by doing things 
that fill you with meaning and happiness. It doesn’t need to be a big thing: we 
might find meaning in being good parents or in helping our neighbors. 

There is no perfect strategy to connecting with our ikigai. But what we learned 
from the Okinawans is that we should not worry too much about finding it. 

Life is not a problem to be solved. Just remember to have something that 
keeps you busy doing what you love while being surrounded by the people who 
love you. 


The ten rules of ikigai 

We’ll conclude this journey with ten rules we’ve distilled from the wisdom of the 
long-living residents of Ogimi: 


1. Stay active; don’t retire. Those who give up the things they love doing and 
do well lose their purpose in life. That’s why it’s so important to keep doing 
things of value, making progress, bringing beauty or utility to others, helping 
out, and shaping the world around you, even after your ‘‘official” professional 
activity has ended. 

2. Take it slow. Being in a hurry is inversely proportional to quality of life. As 
the old saying goes, “Walk slowly and you’ll go far.” When we leave urgency 
behind, life and time take on new meaning. 

3. Don’t fill your stomach. Less is more when it comes to eating for long life, 
too. According to the 80 percent rule, in order to stay healthier longer, we should 
eat a little less than our hunger demands instead of stuffing ourselves. 

4. Surround yourself with good friends. Friends are the best medicine, 
there for confiding worries over a good chat, sharing stories that brighten your 
day, getting advice, having fun, dreaming ... in other words, living. 

5. Get in shape for your next birthday. Water moves; it is at its best when it 
flows fresh and doesn’t stagnate. The body you move through life in needs a bit 
of daily maintenance to keep it running for a long time. Plus, exercise releases 
hormones that make us feel happy. 

6. Smile. A cheerful attitude is not only relaxing—it also helps make friends. 
It’s good to recognize the things that aren’t so great, but we should never forget 
what a privilege it is to be in the here and now in a world so full of possibilities. 

7. Reconnect with nature. Though most people live in cities these days, 
human beings are made to be part of the natural world. We should return to it 
often to recharge our batteries. 

8. Give thanks. To your ancestors, to nature, which provides you with the air 
you breathe and the food you eat, to your friends and family, to everything that 
brightens your days and makes you feel lucky to be alive. Spend a moment every 
day giving thanks, and you’ll watch your stockpile of happiness grow. 

9. Live in the moment. Stop regretting the past and fearing the future. Today 
is all you have. Make the most of it. Make it worth remembering. 

10. Follow your ikigai. There is a passion inside you, a unique talent that 
gives meaning to your days and drives you to share the best of yourself until the 
very end. If you don’t know what your ikigai is yet, as Viktor Frankl says, your 
mission is to discover it. 

The authors of this book wish you a long, happy, and purposeful life. 

Thank you for joining us, 


Hector Garcia and Francesc mtrau.es 



&lt;NI ml tM i/-&gt;| sol M i-h| (Nl ml ml 


NOTES 


Chapter I. Ikigai 

1 Dan Buettner. The Blue Zones: Lessons for Living Longer from the People Who’ve Lived the Longest. 
People in all Blue Zones (except Adventists) drink alcohol moderately and regularly. Moderate drinkers 
outlive nondrinkers. The trick is to drink 1-2 glasses per day (preferably Sardinian Cannonau wine), 
with friends and/or with food. And no, you can’t save up all week and have 14 drinks on Saturday. 
Retrieved via https://www.bluezones.com/2016/1 l/power-9/#sthash.4LTcONED.dpuf. 

Chapter II. Antiaging Secrets 

1_ Eduard Punset. Interview with Shlomo Breznitz for Redes, RTVE (Radio Television Espanola). 

Retrieved via http://www.rtve.es/television/20101024/pon-forma-tu-cerebro/364676.shtml. 

2 Howard S. Friedman and Leslie R. Martin. The Longevity Project: Surprising Discoveries for Health and 
Long Life from the Landmark Eight-Decade Study. Retrieved via http ://www. penguin 
randomhouse.com/books/307681/the-longevity-project-by-howard-s-friedman/9780452297708/. 

Chapter III. From Logotherapy to Ikigai 

1 Viktor E. Frankl, Richard Winston (translator), Clara Winston. The Doctor and the Soul: From 
Psychotherapy to Logotherapy. Vintage, 1986. 

Viktor E. Frankl. Man’s Search for Ultimate Meaning. Basic Books, 2000. 

Ibid. 

Viktor E. Frankl. The Will to Meaning: Foundations and Applications of Logotherapy. Meridian/Plume, 
1988. 

Shoma Morita. Morita Therapy and the True Nature of Anxiety-Based Disorders. State University of New 
York Press, 1998. 

Thich Nhat Hanh. The Miracle of Mindfulness: An Introduction to the Practice of Meditation. Beacon 
Press, 1996. 

Morita. Morita Therapy. 


Chapter IV. Find Flow in Everything You Do 

“Crafting Fun User Experiences: A Method to Facilitate Flow—A Conversation with Owen Schaffer.” 
Retrieved via human factors.com/whitepapers/crafting_fun_ux.asp. 

Ernest Hemingway. On Writing. Scribner, 1984. 

Bertrand Russell. Unpopular Essays. Routledge, 2009. 

The Collected Papers of Albert Einstein, vol. 1. Princeton University Press, 1987. 

Eyal Ophir, Clifford Nass, and Anthony D. Wagner, “Cognitive Control in Media Multitaskers.” 
Retrieved via www.pnas.org/content/106/37/15583.full. 


|VO 100 |~-J |ON 


6 Sara Thomee, Annika Harenstam, and Mats Hagberg, “Mobile Phone Use and Stress, Sleep 
Disturbances, and Symptoms of Depression Among Young Adults—A Prospective Cohort Study.” 
Retrieved via https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3042390/. 

7 Nobuyuki Hayashi. Idainaru Kurieteabu Derekuta No Kiseki. [Steve Jobs: The Greatest Creative 
Director] ASCII Media Works, 2007. It has not been translated into English. 

8 Richard P. Feynman. “What Do You Care What Other People Think?”: Further Adventures of a Curious 
Character. W. W. Norton, 2001. 

Chapter V. Masters of Longevity 

1 Emma Innes, “The secret to a long life? Sushi and sleep, according to the world’s oldest woman,” Daily 
Mail. Retrieved via http://www.dailymail.co.uk/health/article-2572316/The-secret-long-life-Sushi-sleep- 
according-worlds-oldest-woman.html. 

2 “Muere a los 116 la mujer mas longeva segun el Libro Guinness de los Records,” El Pals. Retrieved via 
http://elpais.eom/elpais/2006/08/28/aetualidad/l 156747730_850215.html. 

3 Supercentenarians. Editors: H. Maier, J. Gampe, B. Jeune, J. W. Vaupel, J.-M. Robine. Springer-Verlag, 
2010 . 

4 David Batty, “World’s oldest man dies at 114,” The Guardian. Retrieved via 
https://www.theguardian.com/world/201 l/apr/15/world-oldest-man-dies-at-114. 

5 Ralph Blumenthal, “World’s Oldest Man, Though Only Briefly, Dies at 111 in New York,” New York 
Times. Retrieved via https://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/09/nyregion/worlds-oldest-man-though-only- 
briefly-dies-at-111-in-new-york.html?. 

Henry D. Smith. Hokusai: One Hundred Views of Mt. Fuji. George Braziller, Inc., 1988. 

“Old Masters at the Top of Their Game,” New York Times Magazine. Retrieved via 
http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2014/10/23/magazine/old-masters-at-top-of-their-game.html?_r=0. 
Ibid. 

Toshio Ban. The Osamu Tezuka Story: A Life in Manga and Anime. Stone Bridge Press, 2016. 

10 Rosamund C. Barnett and Caryl Rivers. The Age of Longevity: Re-Imagining Tomorrow for Our New 
Long Lives. Rowman &amp; Littlefield Publishers, 2016. 

11 “Old Masters at the Top of Their Game,” New York Times Magazine. 

12 Ibid. 

13 Ibid. 

14 Ibid. 

15 Ibid. 

Chapter VI. Lessons from Japan’s Centenarians 

1 Strictly speaking, Shinto means “the way of the kami.” In Japanese, kami refers to spirits or phenomena 
that coexist with us in nature. 

2 Washington Burnap. The Sphere and Duties of Woman: A Course of Lectures (1848). Retrieved via 
https://archive-org/details/spheredutiesofwoOOburn. 

Chapter VII. The Ikigai Diet 

1 Bradley J. Willcox, D. Craig Willcox, and Makoto Suzuki. The Okinawa Program: How the World’s 
Longest-Lived People Achieve Everlasting Health—and How You Can Too. Retrieved via 
http ://www.penguinrandomhouse.com/books/190921 /the-okinawa-program-by-bradley-j -willcox-md-d- 
craig-willcox-phd-makoto-suzuki-md-foreword-by-andrew-weil-md/. 


2 Luigi Fontana, Edward P. Weiss, Dennis T. Villareal, Samuel Klein, and John O. Holloszy. “Long-term 
Effects of Calorie or Protein Restriction on Serum IGF-1 and IGFBP-3 Concentration in Humans.” 
Retrieved via https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2673798/. 

3 Edda Cava and Luigi Fontana. “Will Calorie Restriction Work in Humans?” Retrieved via 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3765579/. 

4 W. E. Bronner and G. R. Beecher. “Method for Determining the Content of Catechins in Tea Infusions 
by High-Performance Liquid Chromatography.” Retrieved via 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9618918. 

Chapter VIII. Gentle Movements, Longer Life 

1 “Sitting Is the New Smoking,” Start Standing. Retrieved via http://www.startstanding.org/sitting-new- 
smoking/. 

2 Brigid Schulte, “Health Experts Have Figured Out How Much Time You Should Sit Each Day,” 
Washington Post. Retrieved via https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2015/06/02/medical- 
researchers-have-figured-out-how-much-time-is-okay-to-spend-sitting-each-day/? 
utm_term=.d9d8df01a807. 

3 Kenneth M. Sancier, PhD, “Medical Applications of Qigong,” Alternative Therapies, January 1996(vol. 
2, no. 1). Retrieved via http://www.ichikung.com/pdf/MedicalApplicationsQi gong.pdf. 

4 Yang Jwing-Ming. The Essence of Taiji Qigong. YMAA Publication Center, 1998. 

5 Ge Hong (AD 284-364). Retrieved via https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ge_Hong. 

Chapter IX. Resilience and Wabi-sabi 

4 Epictetus. Discourses and Selected Writings. Penguin, 2008. 

2 Seneca. Letters from a Stoic. Penguin, 2015. 

3 “Ise Shrine,” Encyclopaedia Britannica. Retrieved via https://www.britannica.com/topic/Ise-Shrine. 

4 Nassim Nicholas Taleb. Antifragile: Things That Gain from Disorder. Random House, 2014. 





Professional 



Want to learn more? 

We hope you enjoy this McGraw-Hill eBook! If you’d like 
more information about this book, its author, or related books 
and websites, please click here . 




There are two kinds of people in this life: 
Those who walk into a room and say, 
“Well, here I am!” 

And those who walk in and say, 

“Ahh, there you are.” 



This page intentionally left blank. 



For more information about this title, click here. 

Contents 


Introduction: How to Get Anything You Want 

from Anybody (Well, at Least Have 
the Best Crack at It!). xi 

Part One: How to Intrigue Everyone Without 
Saying a Word: You Only Have Ten 
Seconds to Show You’re a Somebody. i 

1 How to Make Your Smile Magically Different.y 

2 How to Strike Everyone as Intelligent and 

Insightful by Using Your Eyes. p 

3 How to Use Your Eyes to Make Someone Fall in 

Love with You. 14 

4 How to Look Like a Big Winner Wherever You Go. . . . iy 

5 How to Win Their Heart by Responding to Their 

“Inner Infant”. 21 

6 How to Make Someone Feel Like an Old Friend 

at Once.27 

7 How to Come Across as 100 Percent Credible 

to Everyone. 31 

8 How to Read People Like You Have ESP.37 

9 How to Make Sure You Don’t Miss a Single Beat. jp 

v 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 












Part Two: How to Know What to Say After 

You Say “Hi”. 44 

10 How to Start Great Small Talk. 47 

11 How to Sound Like You’ve Got a Super 

Personality (No Matter What You’re Saying!). 41 

12 How to Make People Want to Start a 

Conversation with You. 46 

13 How to Meet the People You Want to Meet. 49 

14 How to Break into a Tight Crowd. 61 

15 How to Make “Where Are You From?” 

Sound Exciting. 64 

16 How to Come Out a Winner Every Time 

They Ask, “And What Do You Do?”. 68 

17 How to Introduce People Like the Host(ess) 

with the Most(est). 71 

18 How to Resuscitate a Dying Conversation.73 

19 How to Enthrall ’Em with Your Choice of 

Topic—Them!. 76 

20 How to Never Need to Wonder, “What Do I 

Say Next?”. 78 

21 How to Get ’Em Happily Chatting (So You Can 

Slip Away if You Want To!). 82 

22 How to Come Across as a Positive Person. 87 

23 How to Always Have Something Interesting 

to Say. 8p 

Part Three: How to Talk Like a VIP.73 

24 How to Find Out What They Do (Without Even 

Asking!). 74 

25 How to Know What to Say When They Ask, 

“What Do You Do?”. 98 

26 How to Sound Even Smarter Than You Are. 104 






















27 How to Not Sound Anxious (Let Them Discover 

Your Similarity). 107 

28 How to Be a “ J6«-Firstie” to Gain Their Respect 

and Affection. no 

29 How to Make Them Feel You “Don’t Smile at 

Just Anybody”. 117 

30 How to Avoid Sounding Like a Jerk. up 

31 How to Use Motivational Speakers’ Techniques to 

Enhance Your Conversation. 121 

32 How to Banter Like the Big Shots Do (Big 

Winners Tell It Like It Is). 127 

33 How to Avoid the World’s Worst Conversational 

Habit. I2p 

34 How to Give Them the Bad News (and Have 

Them Like You All the More). 131 

35 How to Respond When You Don’t Want to 

Answer (and Wish They’d Shut the Heck Up).734 

36 How to Talk to a Celebrity. 176 

37 How to Make Them Want to Thank You. 140 

Part Four: How to Be an Insider in Any Crowd: 

What Are They All Talking About? .... 144 

38 How to Be a Modern-Day Renaissance Man 

or Woman. 147 

39 How to Sound Like You Know All About Their 

Job or Hobby. 170 

40 How to Bare Their Hot Button (Elementary 

Doc-Talk). 174 

41 How to Secretly Learn About Their Lives. 177 

42 How to Talk When You’re in Other Countries. 161 

43 How to Talk Them into Getting the “Insider’s 

Price” (on Practically Anything You Buy) . . . . 167 





















Part Five: How to Sound Like You’re Peas in 

a Pod: “Why, We’re Just Alike!”. 171 

44 How to Make Them Feel You’re of the Same “Class” . J75 

45 How to Make Them Feel That You’re Like “Family”. . 176 

46 How to Really Make It Clear to Them. 182 

47 How to Make Them Feel You Empathize (Without 

Just Saying “Yep, Uh Huh, Yeah”). 186 

48 How to Make Them Think You See/Hear/Feel It 

Just the Way They Do. 188 

49 How to Make ’Em Think We (Instead of You 

vs. Me) . 192 

50 How to Create a Friendly “Private Joke” with Them . . 197 

Part Six: How to Differentiate the Power of 

Praise from the Folly of Flattery. 199 

51 How to Compliment Someone (Without Sounding 

Fike You’re Brownnosing). 202 

52 How to Be a “Carrier Pigeon” of Good Feelings .... 204 

53 How to Make ’Em Feel Your Admiration “Just 

Slipped Out”. 207 

54 How to Win Their Hearts by Being an “Undercover 

Complimenter”. 209 

55 How to Make ’Em Never Forget You with a “Killer 

Compliment”. 211 

56 How to Make ’Em Smile with “Itty-Bitty Boosters”. . 214 

57 How to Praise with Perfect Timing. 217 

58 How to Make ’Em Want to Compliment You . 220 

59 How to Make a Foved One Feel You Are THE 

Partner for Fife. 224 

Part Seven: How to Direct Dial Their Hearts .... 229 

60 How to Sound More Exciting on the Phone. 241 

61 How to Sound Close (Even if You’re Hundreds 

of Miles Away). 244 


















62 How to Make ’Em Happy They Called You.236 

6 3 How to Sneak Past the Gatekeeper. 240 

6 4 How to Get What You Want on the Phone from 

Big Shots. 242 

6 5 How to Get What You Want—by Timing!. 245 

66 How to Impress Everyone with Your Outgoing 

Voicemail Message. 248 

67 How to Get Them to Call You Back.272 

68 How to Make the Gatekeeper Think You’re 

Buddy-Buddy with the VIP.275 

69 How to Make Them Say You Have Super Sensitivity . 277 

70 How to “Listen Between the Lines” on the Phone . . . 277 


Part Eight: How to Work a Party Like a Politician 
Works a Room: The Politician’s Six- 


Point Party Checklist . 26 7 

71 How to Avoid the Most Common Party Blooper .... 270 

72 How to Make an Unforgettable Entrance.272 

73 How to Meet the People YOU Want to Meet.274 

74 How to Subliminally Lure People to You at 

a Gathering. 278 

75 How to Make ’Em Feel Like a Movie Star. 281 

76 How to Amaze Them with What You Remember 

About Them. 287 

77 How to Make the Sale with Your Eyeballs. 288 


Part Nine: How to Break the Most Treacherous 

Glass Ceiling of All: Sometimes People 


Are Tigers.273 

78 How to Win Their Affection by Overlooking 

Their Bloopers. 276 

79 How to Win Their Heart When Their Tongue 

Is Faltering. 700 

80 How to Let ’Em Know “What’s in It” for Them .... 303 




















81 How to Make Them Want to Do Favors for You .... 306 

82 How to Ask for Favors (and Get Them!). 30P 

83 How to Know What Not to Say at Parties. 311 

84 How to Know What Not to Say at Dinner. 314 

85 How to Know What Not to Say in a Chance 

Meeting. 31/ 

86 How to Prepare Them to Listen to You. 319 

87 How to Turn Their Anger Around (in Three 

Sentences or Less). 322 

88 How to Make ’Em Like You (Even When 

You’ve Messed Up). 329 

89 How to Trap a Rat with Class. 327 

90 How to Get Whatever You Want from Service 

Personnel. 330 

91 How to Be a Leader in a Crowd, Not a Follower .... 333 

92 How to Make All the Right Moves. 336 

Notes. 343 














Introduction 

How to Get Anything You Want 
from Anybody (Well, at Least 
Have the Best Crack at It!) 


Have you ever admired those successful people who seem to“have 
it all”? You see them chatting confidently at business meetings or 
comfortably at social parties. They’re the ones with the best jobs, 
the nicest spouses, the finest friends, the biggest bank accounts, or 
the most fashionable zip codes. 

But wait a minute! A lot of them aren’t smarter than you. 
They’re not more educated than you. They’re not even better look¬ 
ing! So what is it? (Some people suspect they inherited it. Others 
say they married it or were just plain lucky. Tell them to think 
again.) What it boils down to is their more skillful way of deal¬ 
ing with fellow human beings. 

You see, nobody gets to the top alone. Over the years, people 
who seem to “have it all” have captured the hearts and conquered 
the minds of hundreds of others who helped boost them, rung by 
rung, to the top of whatever corporate or social ladder they chose. 

Wanna-bes wandering around at the foot of the ladder often 
gaze up and grouse that the big boys and big girls at the top are 
snobs. When big players don’t give them their friendship, love, or 
business, they call them “cliquish” or accuse them of belonging to 
an “old-boy network.” Some grumble they hit their heads against 
a “glass ceiling.” 

The complaining Little Leaguers never realize the rejection 
was their own fault. They’ll never know they blew the affair, the 

xi 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



xii Introduction 


friendship, or the deal because of their own communications fum¬ 
bles. It’s as though well-liked people have a bag of tricks, a magic, 
or a Midas touch that turns everything they do into success. 

What’s in their bag of tricks? You’ll find a lot of things: a sub¬ 
stance that solidifies friendships, a wizardry that wins minds, and 
a magic that makes people fall in love with them. They also pos¬ 
sess a quality that makes bosses hire and then promote, a charac¬ 
teristic that keeps clients coming back, and an asset that makes 
customers buy from them and not the competition. We all have a 
few of those tricks in our bags, some more than others. Those with 
a whole lot of them are big winners in life. How to Talk to Anyone 
gives you ninety-two of these little tricks they use every day so 
you, too, can play the game to perfection and get whatever you 
want in life. 


How the “Little Tricks” Were Unveiled 

Many years ago, a drama teacher, exasperated at my bad acting in 
a college play, shouted, “No! No! Your body is belying your words. 
Every tiny movement, every body position,” he howled, “divulges 
your private thoughts. Your face can make seven thousand differ¬ 
ent expressions, and each exposes precisely who you are and what 
you are thinking at any particular moment.” Then he said some¬ 
thing I’ll never forget: “And your body! The way you move is your 
autobiography in motion.” 

How right he was! On the stage of real life, every physical 
move you make subliminally tells everyone in eyeshot the story of 
your life. Dogs hear sounds our ears can’t detect. Bats see shapes 
in the darkness that elude our eyes. And people make moves that 
are beneath human consciousness but have tremendous power to 
attract or repel. Every smile, every frown, every syllable you utter, 
or every arbitrary choice of word that passes between your lips can 
draw others toward you or make them want to run away. 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



Introduction xiii 


Men—did your gut feeling ever tell you to jump ship on a 
deal? Women—did your women’s intuition make you accept or 
reject an offer? On a conscious level, we may not be aware of what 
the hunch is. But like the ear of the dog or the eye of the bat, the 
elements that make up subliminal sentiments are very real. 

Imagine, please, two humans in a complex box wired with cir¬ 
cuits to record all the signals flowing between the two. As many 
as ten thousand units of information flow per second. “Probably 
the lifetime efforts of roughly half the adult population of the 
United States would be required to sort the units in one hour’s 
interaction between two subjects,” a University of Pennsylvania 
communications authority estimates. 1 

With the zillions of subtle actions and reactions zapping back 
and forth between two human beings, can we come up with con¬ 
crete techniques to make our every communication clear, confi¬ 
dent, credible, and charismatic? 

Determined to find the answer, I read practically every book 
written on communications skills, charisma, and chemistry 
between people. I explored hundreds of studies conducted around 
the world on what qualities made up leadership and credibility. 
Intrepid social scientists left no stone unturned in their quest to 
find the formula. For example, optimistic Chinese researchers, 
hoping charisma might be in the diet, went so far as to compare 
the relationship of personality type to the catecholamine level in 
subjects’ urine. 7 Needless to say, their thesis was soon shelved. 

Dale Carnegie Was GREAT for the 
Twentieth Century, but This Is the 
Twenty-First 

Most of the studies simply confirmed Dale Carnegie’s 1936 classic, 
How to Win Friends and Influence People.- His wisdom for the ages 
said success lay in smiling, showing interest in other people, and 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



xiv Introduction 


making them feel good about themselves. “That’s no surprise,” I 
thought. It’s as true today as it was more than sixty years ago. 

So if Dale Carnegie and hundreds of others since offer the 
same astute advice, why do we need another book telling us how 
to win friends and influence people? Two mammoth reasons. 

Reason One: Suppose a sage told you, “When in China, 
speak Chinese,” but gave you no language lessons? Dale Carnegie 
and many communications experts are like that sage. They tell us 
what to do but not how to do it. In today’s sophisticated world, 
it’s not enough to say “smile” or “give sincere compliments.” Cyn¬ 
ical businesspeople today see more subtleties in your smile, more 
complexities in your compliment. Accomplished or attractive peo¬ 
ple are surrounded by smiling sycophants feigning interest and 
fawning all over them. Prospects are tired of salespeople who say, 
“The suit looks great on you,” when their fingers are caressing cash 
register keys. Women are wary of suitors who say, “You are beau¬ 
tiful,” when the bedroom door is in view. 

Reason Two: The world is a very different place than it was 
in 1936, and we need a new formula for success. To find it, I 
observed the superstars of today. I explored techniques used by 
top salespeople to close the sale, speakers to convince, clergy to 
convert, performers to engross, sex symbols to seduce, and ath¬ 
letes to win. 

I found concrete building blocks to the elusive qualities that 
lead to their success. Then I broke them down into easily digestible, 
news-you-can-use techniques. I gave each a name that will quickly 
come to mind when you find yourself in a communications conun¬ 
drum. As I developed the techniques, I began sharing them with 
audiences around the country. Participants in my communications 
seminars gave me their ideas. My clients, many of them CEOs of 
Fortune 500 companies, enthusiastically offered their observations. 

When I was in the presence of the most successful and 
beloved leaders, I analyzed their body language and their facial 



Introduction xv 


expressions. I listened carefully to their casual conversations, their 
timing, and their choice of words. I watched as they dealt with 
their families, friends, associates, and adversaries. Every time I 
detected a little nip of magic in their communicating, I asked 
them to pluck it out with tweezers and expose it to the bright light 
of consciousness. We analyzed it together, and I then turned it 
into an easy-to-do “little trick” others could duplicate and profit 
from. 

My findings and the strokes of some of those very effective 
folks are in this book. Some are subtle. Some are surprising. But 
all are achievable. When you master them, everyone from new 
acquaintances to family, friends, and business associates will hap¬ 
pily open their hearts, homes, companies, and even wallets to give 
you whatever they can. 

There’s a bonus. As you sail through life with your new com¬ 
munications skills, you’ll look back and see some very happy givers 
smiling in your wake. 



This page intentionally left blank. 



PART ONE 

How to Intrigue 
Everyone Without 
Saying a Word 


You Only Have Ten Seconds to 
Show You’re a Somebody 


The exact moment that two humans lay eyes on each other has 
awesome potency. The first sight of you is a brilliant holograph. 
It burns its way into your new acquaintance’s eyes and can stay 
emblazoned in his or her memory forever. 

Artists are sometimes able to capture this quicksilver, fleeting 
emotional response. My friend Robert Grossman is an accom¬ 
plished caricature artist who draws regularly for Forbes, Newsweek, 
Sports Illustrated, Rolling Stone, and other popular publications. 
Bob has a unique gift for capturing not only the physical appear¬ 
ance of his subjects, but for zeroing in on the essence of their per¬ 
sonalities. The bodies and souls of hundreds of luminaries radiate 
from his sketch pad. One glance at his caricatures of famous peo¬ 
ple and you can actually “see” their personalities. 

i 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



2 How to Talk to Anyone 


Sometimes at a party, Bob will do a quick sketch on a cock¬ 
tail napkin of a guest. Hovering over Bob’s shoulder, the onlook¬ 
ers gasp as they watch their friend’s image and essence materialize 
before their eyes. When he’s finished drawing, he puts his pen 
down and hands the napkin to the subject. Often a puzzled look 
comes over the subject’s face. He or she usually mumbles some 
politeness like, “Well, er, that’s great. But it really isn’t me.” 

The crowd’s convincing crescendo of “Oh yes it is!” drowns 
the subject out and squelches any lingering doubt. The confused 
subject is left to stare back at the world’s view of himself or her¬ 
self in the napkin. 

Once when I was visiting Bob’s studio, I asked him how he 
could capture people’s personalities so well. He said, “It’s simple. 
I just look at them.” 

“No,” I asked, “How do you capture their personalities? Don’t 
you have to do a lot of research about their lifestyle, their history?” 

“No, I told you, Leil, I just look at them.” 

“Huh?” 

He went on to explain, “Almost every facet of people’s per¬ 
sonalities is evident from their appearance, their posture, the way 
they move. For instance ...” he said, calling me over to a file where 
he kept his caricatures of political figures. 

“See,” Bob said, pointing to angles on various presidential body 
parts, “here’s the boyishness of Clinton,” showing me his half smile; 
“the awkwardness of the elder George Bush,” pointing to his shoul¬ 
der angle; “the charm of Reagan,” noting the ex-president’s smiling 
eyes; “the shiftiness of Nixon,” pointing to the furtive tilt of his 
head. Digging a little deeper into his file, he pulled out Franklin 
Delano Roosevelt and, pointing to the nose high in the air, “Here’s 
the pride of FDR.” It’s all in the face and the body. 

First impressions are indelible. Why? Because in our fast- 
paced, information-overload world of multiple stimuli bombard¬ 
ing us every second, people’s heads are spinning. They must form 



How to Intrigue Everyone Without Saying a Word 3 


quick judgments to make sense of the world and get on with what 
they have to do. So, whenever people meet you, they take an 
instant mental snapshot. That image of you becomes the data they 
deal with for a very long time. 

Your Body Shrieks Before Your 
Lips Can Speak 

Are their data accurate? Amazingly enough, yes. Even before your 
lips part and the first syllable escapes, the essence of YOU has 
already axed its way into their brains. The way you look and the 
way you move is more than 80 percent of someone’s first impres¬ 
sion of you. Not one word need be spoken. 

I’ve lived and worked in countries where I didn’t speak the 
native language. Yet, without one understandable syllable spoken 
between us, the years proved my first impressions were on target. 
Whenever I met new colleagues, I could tell instantly how friendly 
they felt toward me, how confident they were, and approximately 
how much stature they had in the company. I could sense, just 
from seeing them move, who the heavyweights were and who were 
the welterweights. 

I have no extrasensory skill. You’d know, too. How? Because 
before you have had time to process a rational thought, you get a 
sixth sense about someone. Studies have shown emotional reac¬ 
tions occur even before the brain has had time to register what’s 
causing that reaction. 4 Thus the moment someone looks at you, 
he or she experiences a massive hit, the impact of which lays the 
groundwork for the entire relationship. Bob told me he captures 
that first hit in creating his caricatures. 

Deciding to pursue my own agenda for How to Talk to Any¬ 
one, I asked, “Bob, if you wanted to portray somebody really 
cool—you know, intelligent, strong, charismatic, principled, fas¬ 
cinating, caring, interested in other people. ...” 



4 How to Talk to Anyone 


“Easy,” Bob interrupted. He knew precisely what I was get¬ 
ting at. “Just give ’em great posture, a heads-up look, a confident 
smile, and a direct gaze.” It’s the ideal image for somebody who’s 
a Somebody. 


How to Look Like a Somebody 

My friend Karen is a highly respected professional in the home- 
furnishings business. Her husband is an equally big name in the 
communications field. They have two small sons. 

Whenever Karen is at a home-furnishings industry event, 
everyone pays deference to her. She’s a very important person in 
that world. Her colleagues at conventions jostle for position just 
to be seen casually chatting with her and, they hope, be pho¬ 
tographed rubbing elbows with her for industry bibles like Home 
Furnishings Executive and Furniture World. 

Yet, Karen complains, when she accompanies her husband to 
communications functions, she might as well be a nobody. When 
she takes her kids to school functions, she’s just another mom. She 
once asked me, “Leil, how can I stand out from the crowd so peo¬ 
ple who don’t know me will approach me and at least assume I’m 
an interesting person?” The techniques in this section accomplish 
precisely that. When you use the next nine techniques, you will 
come across as a special person to everyone you meet. You will 
stand out as a Somebody in whatever crowd you find yourself in, 
even if it’s not your crowd. 

Let’s start with your smile. 



i How to Make Your 
Smile Magically 
Different 


In 1936, one of Dale Carnegie’s six musts in How to Win Friends 
and Influence People was SMILE! His edict has been echoed each 
decade by practically every communications guru who ever put 
pen to paper or mouth to microphone. However, at the turn of 
the millennium, it’s high time we reexamine the role of the smile 
in high-level human relations. When you dig deeper into Dale’s 
dictum, you’ll find a 1936 quick smile doesn’t always work. Espe¬ 
cially nowadays. 

The old-fashioned instant grin carries no weight with today’s 
sophisticated crowd. Look at world leaders, negotiators, and cor¬ 
porate giants. Not a smiling sycophant among them. Key players 
in all walks of life enrich their smile so, when it does erupt, it has 
more potency and the world smiles with them. 

Researchers have catalogued dozens of different types of 
smiles. They range from the tight rubber band of a trapped liar to 
the soft squishy smile of a tickled infant. Some smiles are warm 
while others are cold. There are real smiles and fake smiles. (You’ve 
seen plenty of those plastered on the faces of friends who say they’re 
“delighted you decided to drop by,” and presidential candidates vis¬ 
iting your city who say they’re “thrilled to be in, uh . . . uh. . . .”) 


5 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



6 How to Talk to Anyone 


Big winners know their smile is one of their most powerful 
weapons, so they’ve fine-tuned it for maximum impact. 


How to Fine-Tune Your Smile 

Just last year, my old college friend Missy took over her family 
business, a Midwestern company supplying corrugated boxes to 
manufacturers. One day she called saying she was coming to New 
York to court new clients and she invited me to dinner with sev¬ 
eral of her prospects. I was looking forward to once again seeing 
my friend’s quicksilver smile and hearing her contagious laugh. 
Missy was an incurable giggler, and that was part of her charm. 

When her Dad passed away last year, she told me she was tak¬ 
ing over the business. I thought Missy’s personality was a little 
bubbly to be a CEO in a tough business. But, hey, what do I know 
about the corrugated box biz? 

She, three of her potential clients, and I met in the cocktail 
lounge of a midtown restaurant and, as we led them into the din¬ 
ing room, Missy whispered in my ear, “Please call me Melissa 
tonight.” 

“Of course,” I winked back, “not many company presidents 
are called Missy!” Soon after the maitre d’ seated us, I began notic¬ 
ing Melissa was a very different woman from the giggling girl I’d 
known in college. She was just as charming; she smiled as much 
as ever. Yet something was different. I couldn’t quite put my fin¬ 
ger on it. 

Although she was still effervescent, I had the distinct impres¬ 
sion everything Melissa said was more insightful and sincere. She 
was responding with genuine warmth to her prospective clients, 
and I could tell they liked her, too. I was thrilled because my 
friend was scoring a knockout that night. By the end of the eve¬ 
ning, Melissa had three big new clients. 



How to Make Your Smile Magically Different 7 


Afterward, alone with her in the cab, I said, “Missy, you’ve 
really come a long way since you took over the company. Your 
whole personality has developed, well, a really cool, sharp corpo¬ 
rate edge.” 

“Uh uh, only one thing has changed,” she said. 

“What’s that?” 

“My smile,” she said. 

“Your what?” I asked incredulously. 

“My smile,” she repeated as though I hadn’t heard her. “You 
see,” she said, with a distant look coming into her eyes, “when Dad 
got sick and knew in a few years I’d have to take over the business, 
he sat me down and had a life-changing conversation with me. I’ll 
never forget his words. Dad said, ‘Missy, Honey, remember that 
old song, “I Loves Ya, Honey, But Yer Feet’s Too Big”? Well, if 
you’re going to make it big in the box business, let me say, “I loves 
ya, Honey, but your smile’s too quick.” ’ 

“He then brought out a yellowed newspaper article quoting a 
study he’d been saving to show me when the time was right. It con¬ 
cerned women in business. The study showed women who were 
slower to smile in corporate life were perceived as more credible.” 

As Missy talked, I began to think about history-making 
women like Margaret Thatcher, Indira Gandhi, Golda Meir, 
Madeleine Albright, and other powerful women of their ilk. Not 
one was known for her quick smile. 

Missy continued, “The study went on to say a big, warm smile 
is an asset. But only when it comes a little slower, because then it 
has more credibility.” From that moment on, Missy explained, she 
gave clients and business associates her big smile. However, she 
trained her lips to erupt more slowly. Thus her smile appeared 
more sincere and personalized for the recipient. 

That was it! Missy’s slower smile gave her personality a richer, 
deeper, more sincere cachet. Though the delay was less than a sec- 



8 How to Talk to Anyone 


ond, the recipients of her beautiful big smile felt it was special and 
just for them. 

I decided to do more research on the smile. When you’re in 
the market for shoes, you begin to look at everyone’s feet. When 
you decide to change your hairstyle, you look at everyone’s hair¬ 
cut. Well, for several months, I became a steady smile watcher. I 
watched smiles on the street. I watched smiles on TV. I watched 
the smiles of politicians, the clergy, corporate giants, and world 
leaders. My findings? Amid the sea of flashing teeth and parting 
lips, I discovered the people perceived to have the most credibil¬ 
ity and integrity were just ever so slower to smile. Then, when they 
did, their smiles seemed to seep into every crevice of their faces 
and envelop them like a slow flood. Thus I call the following tech¬ 
nique “The Flooding Smile.” 


2 $ 


ECHNIQUE #1 

The Flooding Smile 


Don’t flash an immediate smile when you greet 
someone, as though anyone who walked into your line 
of sight would be the beneficiary. Instead, look at the 
other person’s face for a second. Pause. Soak in their 
persona. Then let a big, warm, responsive smile flood 
over your face and overflow into your eyes. It will 
engulf the recipient like a warm wave. The split-second 
delay convinces people your flooding smile is genuine 
and only for them. 


Let us now travel but a few inches north to two of the most 
powerful communications tools you possess, your eyes. 



-2 How to Strike Everyone as 
Intelligent and Insightful 
hy Using Your Eyes 


It’s only a slight exaggeration to say Helen of Troy could launch 
ships with her eyes and Davy Crockett could stare down a bear. 
Your eyes are personal grenades that have the power to detonate 
people’s emotions. Just as martial arts masters register their fists as 
lethal weapons, you can register your eyes as psychological lethal 
weapons when you master the following eye-contact techniques. 

Beloved people in the game of life look beyond the conven¬ 
tional wisdom that teaches “Keep good eye contact.” For one, they 
understand that to certain suspicious or insecure people, intense 
eye contact can be a virulent intrusion. 

When I was growing up, my family had a Haitian house¬ 
keeper whose fantasies were filled with witches, warlocks, and 
black magic. Zola refused to be left alone in a room with Louie, 
my Siamese cat. “Louie looks right through me—sees my soul,” 
she’d whisper to me fearfully. 

In some cultures, intense eye contact is sorcery. In others, star¬ 
ing at someone can be threatening or disrespectful. Realizing this, 
big players in the international scene prefer to pack a book on cul¬ 
tural body-language differences in their carry-on rather than a 
Berlitz phrase book. In our culture, however, big winners know 
exaggerated eye contact can be extremely advantageous, especially 


9 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



io How to Talk to Anyone 


between the sexes. In business, even when romance is not in the 
picture, strong eye contact packs a powerful wallop between men 
and women. 

A Boston center conducted a study to learn the precise effect . 5 
The researchers asked opposite-sex individuals to have a two- 
minute casual conversation. They tricked half their subjects into 
maintaining intense eye contact by directing them to count the 
number of times their partner blinked. They gave the other half 
of the subjects no special eye-contact directions for the chat. 

When they questioned the subjects afterward, the unsuspect¬ 
ing blinkers reported significantly higher feelings of respect and 
fondness for their colleagues who, unbeknownst to them, had sim¬ 
ply been counting their blinks. 

I’ve experienced the closeness intense eye contact engenders 
with a stranger firsthand. Once, when giving a seminar to several 
hundred people, one woman’s face in the crowd caught my atten¬ 
tion. The participant’s appearance was not particularly unique. Yet 
she became the focus of my attention throughout my talk. Why? 
Because not for one moment did she take her eyes off my face. 
Even when I finished making a point and was silent, her eyes 
stayed hungrily on my face. I sensed she couldn’t wait to savor the 
next insight to spout from my lips. I loved it! Her concentration 
and obvious fascination inspired me to remember stories and make 
important points I’d long forgotten. 

Right after my talk, I resolved to seek out this new friend who 
was so enthralled by my speech. As people were leaving the hall, 
I quickly sidled up behind my big fan. “Excuse me,” I said. My 
fan kept walking. “Excuse me,” I repeated a tad louder. My 
admirer didn’t vary her pace as she continued out the door. I fol¬ 
lowed her into the corridor and tapped her shoulder gently. This 
time she whirled around with a surprised look on her face. I mum¬ 
bled some excuse about my appreciating her concentration on my 
talk and wanting to ask her a few questions. 



How to Strike Everyone as Intelligent and Insightful by Using Your Eyes n 


“Did you, uh, get much out of the seminar?” I ventured. 

“Well, not really,” she answered candidly. “I had difficulty 
understanding what you were saying because you were walking 
around on the platform facing different directions.” 

In a heartbeat, I understood. The woman was hearing 
impaired. I did not captivate her as I had suspected. She was not 
intrigued by my talk as I had hoped. The only reason she kept her 
eyes glued on my face was because she was struggling to read my 
lips! 

Nevertheless, her eye contact had given me such pleasure and 
inspiration during my talk that, tired as I was, I asked her to join 
me for coffee. I spent the next hour recapping my entire seminar 
just for her. Powerful stuff this eye contact. 

Make Your Eyes Look Even 
More Intelligent 

There is yet another argument for intense eye contact. In addition 
to awakening feelings of respect and affection, maintaining strong 
eye contact gives you the impression of being an intelligent and 
abstract thinker. Because abstract thinkers integrate incoming data 
more easily than concrete thinkers, they can continue looking into 
someone’s eyes even during the silences. Their thought processes 
are not distracted by peering into their partner’s peepers . 6 

Back to our valiant psychologists. Yale researchers, thinking 
they had the unswerving truth about eye contact, conducted 
another study that, they assumed, would confirm “the more eye 
contact, the more positive feelings.” This time, they directed sub¬ 
jects to deliver a personally revealing monologue. They asked the 
listeners to react with a sliding scale of eye contact while their part¬ 
ners talked. 

The results? All went as expected when women told their per¬ 
sonal stories to women. Increased eye contact encouraged feelings 



i2 How to Talk to Anyone 


of intimacy. But, whoops, it wasn’t so with the men. Some men 
felt hostile when stared at too long by another man. Other men 
felt threatened. Some few even suspected their partner was more 
interested than he should be and wanted to slug him. 

Your partner’s emotional reaction to your profound gaze has 
a biological base. When you look intently at someone, it increases 
their heartbeat and shoots an adrenalinelike substance gushing 
through their veins . 7 This is the same physical reaction people have 
when they start to fall in love. And when you consciously increase 
your eye contact, even during normal business or social interac¬ 
tion, people will feel they have captivated you. 

Men talking to women and women talking to men or women: 
use the following technique, which I call “Sticky Eyes,” for the joy 
of the recipient—and for your own advantage. (Guys, I’ll have a 
man-to-man modification of this technique for you in a moment.) 


4 * 


ECHNIQUE #2 

Sticky Eyes 


Pretend your eyes are glued to your conversation 
partner’s with sticky warm taffy. Don’t break eye 
contact even after he or she has finished speaking. 
When you must look away, do it ever so slowly, 
reluctantly, stretching the gooey taffy until the tiny 
string finally breaks. 


What About Guys’ Eyes? 

Now gentlemen: when talking to men, you, too, can use Sticky 
Eyes. Just make them a little less sticky when discussing personal 
matters with other men, lest your listener feel threatened or mis¬ 
interpret your intentions. But do increase your eye contact slightly 



How to Strike Everyone as Intelligent and Insightful by Using Your Eyes 13 


more than normal with men on day-to-day communications— 
and a lot more when talking to women. It broadcasts a visceral 
message of comprehension and respect. 

I have a friend, Sammy, a salesman who unwittingly comes 
across as an arrogant chap. He doesn’t mean to, but sometimes his 
brusque manner makes it look like he’s running roughshod over 
people’s feelings. 

Once while we were having dinner together in a restaurant, I 
told him about the Sticky Eyes technique. I guess he took it to 
heart. When the waiter came over, Sammy, uncharacteristically, 
instead of bluntly blurting out his order with his nose in the menu, 
looked at the waiter. He smiled, gave his order for the appetizer, 
and kept his eyes on the waiter’s for an extra second before look¬ 
ing down again at the menu to choose the main dish. I can’t tell 
you how different Sammy seemed to me just then! He came across 
as a sensitive and caring man, and all it took was two extra sec¬ 
onds of eye contact. I saw the effect it had on the waiter, too. We 
received exceptionally gracious service the rest of the evening. 

A week later Sammy called me and said, “Leil, Sticky Eyes has 
changed my life. I’ve been following it to a T. With women, I 
make my eyes real sticky and with men slightly sticky. And now 
everybody’s treating me with such deference. I think it’s part of 
the reason I’ve made more sales this week than all last month!” 

If you deal with customers or clients in your professional life, 
Sticky Eyes is a definite boon to your bottom line. To most peo¬ 
ple in our culture, profound eye contact signals trust, knowledge, 
an “I’m here for you” attitude. 

Let’s carry Sticky Eyes one step further. Like a potent medi¬ 
cine that has the power to kill or cure, the next eye-contact tech¬ 
nique has the potential to captivate or annihilate. 



3 How to Use Your Eyes 
to Make Someone Fall 
in Love with You 


Now we haul in the heavy eyeball artillery: very sticky eyes or 
superglue eyes. Lets call them “Epoxy Eyes.” Big bosses use Epoxy 
Eyes to evaluate employees. Police investigators use Epoxy Eyes to 
intimidate suspected criminals. And clever Romeos use Epoxy 
Eyes to make women fall in love with them. (If romance is your 
goal, Epoxy Eyes is a proven aphrodisiac.) 

The Epoxy Eyes technique takes at least three people to pull 
off—you, your target, and one other person. Here’s how it works. 
Usually, when you’re chatting with two or more people, you gaze 
at the person who is speaking. However, the Epoxy Eyes technique 
suggests you concentrate on the listener—your target—rather than 
the speaker. This slightly disorients the target and he or she silently 
asks, “Why is this person looking at me instead of the speaker?” 
Your target senses you are extremely interested in his or her reac¬ 
tions. This can be beneficial in certain business situations when it 
is appropriate that you judge the listener. 

Human resources professionals often use Epoxy Eyes, not as 
a technique, but because they are sincerely interested in a pro¬ 
spective employee’s reaction to certain ideas being presented. 
Attorneys, bosses, police investigators, psychologists, and others 


14 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Use Your Eyes to Make Someone Fall in Love with You 15 


who must examine subjects’ reactions also use Epoxy Eyes for ana¬ 
lytical purposes. 

When you use Epoxy Eyes, it sends out signals of interest 
blended with complete confidence in yourself. But because Epoxy 
Eyes puts you in a position of evaluating or judging someone else, 
you must be careful. Don’t overdo it or you could come across as 
arrogant and brazen. 


-V. 


ECHNIQUE #3 

Epoxy Eyes 


This brazen technique packs a powerful punch. Watch 
your target person even when someone else is talking. 
No matter who is speaking, keep looking at the man or 
woman you want to impact. 


Sometimes using full Epoxy Eyes is too potent, so here is a 
gentler, yet effective, form. Watch the speaker but let your glance 
bounce to your target each time the speaker finishes a point. This 
way Mr. or Ms. Target still feels you are intrigued by his or her 
reactions, yet there is relief from the intensity. 


Use Epoxy Eyes to Push Their 
Erotic Button 

If romance is on the horizon, Epoxy Eyes transmits yet another 
message. It says, “I can’t take my eyes off you” or “I only have eyes 
for you.” Anthropologists have dubbed eyes “the initial organ of 
romance” because studies show intense eye contact plays havoc 
with our heartbeat . 8 It also releases a druglike substance into our 



16 How to Talk to Anyone 


nervous system called phenylethylamine. Since this is the hormone 
detected in the human body during erotic excitement, intense eye 
contact can be a turn-on. 

Men, Epoxy Eyes is extremely effective on women—if they 
find you attractive. The lady interprets her nervous reaction to 
your untoward gaze as budding infatuation. If she does not like 
you, however, your Epoxy Eyes is downright obnoxious. (Never 
use Epoxy Eyes on strangers in public settings or you could get 
arrested!) 



4 How to Look Like a 
Big Winner Wherever 
You 60 


Do you remember the lyrics to the old Shirley Bassey song? “The 
minute you walked in the joint, I could see you were a man of dis¬ 
tinction—a real big spender. Good looking, so refined. Say 
wouldn’t you like to know what’s going on in my mind?” 

The goal of this first section is not to make you look like a 
real big spender. Rather it is to give you the cachet of a real big 
Somebody the moment people lay eyes on you. To that end, we 
now explore the most important technique to make you look like 
a very important person. 

When the doctor smacks your knee with that nasty little ham¬ 
mer, your foot jerks forward. Thus the phrase knee-jerk reaction. 
Your body has another instinctive reaction. When a big jolt of hap¬ 
piness hits your heart and you feel like a winner, your head jerks 
up automatically and you throw your shoulders back. A smile 
frames your lips and softens your eyes. 

This is the look winners have constantly. They stand with 
assurance. They move with confidence. They smile softly with 
pride. No doubt about it—good posture symbolizes that you are 
a man or woman who is used to being on top. 


17 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



18 How to Talk to Anyone 


Obviously millions of mothers sticking their knuckles be¬ 
tween their kids’ shoulder blades, and trillions of teachers telling 
students, “Stand up straight!” hasn’t done the trick. We are a 
nation of slouchers. We need a technique more stern than teach¬ 
ers and more persuasive than parents to make us stand like a 
Somebody. 

In one profession, perfect posture, perfect equilibrium, per¬ 
fect balance is not only desirable—it’s a matter of life and death. 
One false move, one slump of the shoulders, one hangdog look, 
can mean curtains for the high-wire acrobat. 

I’ll never forget the first time Mama took me to the circus. 
When seven men and women raced into the center ring, the 
crowd rose as though they were all joined at the hips. They 
cheered with one thunderous voice. Mama pressed her lips against 
my ear and reverently whispered these were the Great Wallen- 
das, the only troupe in the world to perform the seven-person 
pyramid without a net. 

In an instant, the crowd became hushed. Not a cough or a 
soda slurp was heard in the big top as Karl and Herman Wallenda 
shouted cues in German to their trusting relatives. The family 
meticulously and majestically ascended into the position of a 
human pyramid. They then balanced precariously on a thin wire 
hundreds of feet above the hard dirt with no net between them 
and sudden death. The vision was unforgettable. 

To me, equally unforgettable was the beauty and grace of the 
seven Wallendas racing into the center of the big top to take their 
bows. Each perfectly aligned—head high, shoulders back—stand¬ 
ing so tall it still didn’t seem like their feet were touching the 
ground. Every muscle in their bodies defined pride, success, and 
their joy of being alive. (Still!) Here is a visualization technique to 
get your body looking like a winner who is in the habit of feeling 
that pride, success, and joy of being alive. 



How to Look Like a Big Winner Wherever You Go ip 


Your Posture Is Y)ur Biggest 
Success Barometer 

Imagine you are a world-renowned acrobat, master of the iron-jaw 
act waiting in the wings of the Ringling Bros, and Barnum &amp; Bai¬ 
ley Circus. Soon you will dart into the center ring to captivate the 
crowd with the precision and balance of your body. 

Before walking through any door—the door to your office, a 
party, a meeting, even your kitchen—picture a leather bit hang¬ 
ing by a cable from the frame. It is swinging just an inch higher 
than your head. As you pass through the door, throw your head 
back and chomp on the imaginary dental grip that first pulls your 
cheeks back into a smile and then lifts you up. As you ascend high 
above the gasping crowd, your body is stretched into perfect align¬ 
ment—head high, shoulders back, torso out of hips, feet weight¬ 
less. At the zenith of the tent, you spin like a graceful top to the 
amazement and admiration of the crowd craning their necks to 
watch you. Now you look like a Somebody. 

One day, to test Hang by Your Teeth, I decided to count how 
many times I walked through a doorway: sixty times, even at 
home. You calculate: twice out your front door, twice in, six times 
to the bathroom, eight times to the kitchen, and through count¬ 
less doors at your office. It adds up. Visualize anything sixty times 
a day and it becomes a habit! Habitual good posture is the first 
mark of a big winner. 

You are now ready to float into the room to captivate the 
crowd or close the sale (or maybe just settle for looking like the 
most important Somebody in the room). 

You now have all the basics Bob the artist needs to portray 
you as a big winner. Like he said, “great posture, a heads-up look, 
a confident smile, and a direct gaze.” The ideal image for some¬ 
body who’s a Somebody. 



20 How to Talk to Anyone 


Zh 


ECHNIQUE #4 

Hang by Your Teeth 


Visualize a circus iron-jaw bit hanging from the frame 
of every door you walk through. Take a bite and, with 
it firmly between your teeth, let it swoop you to the 
peak of the big top. When you hang by your teeth, 
every muscle is stretched into perfect posture position. 


Now let’s put the whole act into motion. It’s time to turn your 
attention outward to your conversation partner. Use the next two 
techniques to make him or her feel like a million. 



5^ How to Win Their 
Heart hy Responding to 
Their “Inner Infant” 


Remember the old joke? The comic comes onstage and the first 
words out of his mouth are, “Well, how do you like me so far?” 
The audience always cracks up. Why? Because we all silently ask 
that question. Whenever we meet someone, we know, consciously 
or subconsciously, how they’re reacting to us. 

Do they look at us? Do they smile? Do they lean toward us? 
Do they somehow recognize how wonderful and special we are? 
We like those people. They have good taste. Or do they turn away, 
obviously unimpressed by our magnificence. The cretins! 

Two people getting to know each other are like little puppies 
sniffing each other out. We don’t have tails that wag or hair that 
bristles. But we do have eyes that narrow or widen. And hands 
that flash knuckles or subconsciously soften in the palms-up “I 
submit” position. We have dozens of other involuntary reactions 
that take place in the first few moments of togetherness. 

Attorneys conducting voir dire are exquisitely aware of this. 
They pay close attention to your instinctive body reactions. They 
watch to see how fully you are facing them and just how far for¬ 
ward or back you’re leaning while answering their questions. They 
check out your hands. Are they softly open, palms up, signifying 
acceptance of the ideas they’re expressing? Or are you making a 
slight fist, knuckles out, signaling rejection? They scrutinize your 

21 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



22 How to Talk to Anyone 


face for the split seconds you break eye contact when discussing 
relevant subjects like your feelings on big awards for damages or 
the death penalty. Sometimes attorneys bring along a legal assis¬ 
tant whose sole job is to sit on the sidelines and take precise note 
of your every fidget. 

An interesting aside: trial lawyers often choose women to do 
this twitch-and-turn spying job because, traditionally, females are 
sharper observers of subtle body cues than males. Women, more 
sensitive to emotions than men, often ask their husbands, “Is 
something bothering you, Honey?” (These supersensitive women 
accuse their husbands of being so insensitive to emotions that they 
wouldn’t notice anything is wrong until their neckties are drenched 
in her tears.) 

The attorney and the assistant then review your “score” on the 
dozens of subconscious signals you flashed. Depending on their 
tally, you could find yourself on jury duty or twiddling your 
thumbs back in the juror’s waiting room. 

Trial lawyers are so conscious of body language that, in the 
1960s during the famous trial of the Chicago Seven, defense attor¬ 
ney William Kuntsler actually made a legal objection to Judge 
Julius Hoffman’s posture. During the summation by the prosecu¬ 
tion, Judge Hoffman leaned forward, which, accused Kuntsler, 
sent a message to the jury of attention and interest. During his 
defense summation, complained Kuntsler, Judge Hoffman leaned 
back, sending the jury a subliminal message of disinterest. 

You’re on Trial—and You Only Have 
Ten Seconds 

Like attorneys deciding whether they want you on their case, 
everybody you meet makes a subconscious judgment on whether 
they want you in their lives. They base their verdict greatly on the 
same signals, your body-language answer to their unspoken ques¬ 
tion, “Well, how do you like me so far?” 



How to Win Their Heart by Responding to Their “Inner Infant” 25 


The first few moments of your reactions set the stage upon 
which the entire relationship will be played out. If you ever want 
anything from the new acquaintance, your unspoken answer to 
their unspoken question, “How do you like me so far?” must be, 
“Wow! I really like you.” 

When a little four year old feels bashful, he slumps, puts his 
arms up in front of his chest, steps back, and hides behind 
Mommy’s skirt. However, when little Johnny sees Daddy come 
home, he runs up to him, he smiles, his eyes get wide, and he 
opens his arms for a hug. A loving child’s body is like a tiny flower 
bud unfolding to the sunshine. 

Twenty, thirty, forty, fifty years of life on earth make little dif¬ 
ference. When forty-year-old Johnny is feeling timid, he slumps 
and folds his arms in front of his chest. When he wants to reject 
a salesman or business colleague, he turns away and closes him off 
with a myriad of body signals. However, when welcoming his 
loved one home after an absence, big Johnny opens his body to 
her like a giant daffodil spreading its petals to the sun after a 
rainstorm. 


Treat People Like Big Babies 

Once I was at a corporate star-studded party with an attractive, 
recently divorced friend of mine. Carla had been a copywriter 
with one of the leading advertising agencies which, like so many 
companies then, had downsized. My girlfriend was both out of 
work and out of a relationship. 

At this particular party, the pickings for Carla were good, both 
personally and professionally. Several times as Carla and I stood 
talking, one good-looking corporate male beast or another would 
find himself within a few feet of us. More often than not, one of 
these desirable males would flash his teeth at Carla. She sometimes 
graced the tentatively courting male with a quick smile over her 
shoulder. But then she’d turn back to our mundane conversation 



24 How to Talk to Anyone 


as though she were hanging on my every word. I knew she was 
trying not to look anxious, but inside Carla was crying out, “Why 
doesn’t he come speak to us?” 

Right after one prize corporate Big Cat smiled but, because 
of Carla’s minimal reaction, wandered back into the social jungle, 
I had to say, “Carla, do you know who that was? He’s the head of 
the Young &amp; Rubicam in Paris. They’re looking for copywriters 
willing to relocate. And he’s single!” Carla moaned. 

Just then we heard a little voice down by Carla’s left knee. 
“Hello!” We looked down simultaneously. Little five-year-old 
Willie, the hostess’s adorable young son, was tugging on Carla’s 
skirt, obviously craving attention. 

“Well, well, well,” Carla cried out, a big smile erupting all over 
her face. Carla turned toward him. Carla kneeled down, touched 
little Willie’s elbow, and crooned, “Well, hello there, Willie. How 
are you enjoying Mommy’s nice party?” 

Little Willie beamed. 

When little Willie finally trundled off to tug on the garments 
of the next group of potential attention givers, Carla and I 
returned to our grown-up conversing. During our chat, corporate 
beasts continued to stalk Carla with their eyes and she continued 
casting half smiles at them. She was obviously disappointed none 
of them was making a further approach. I had to bite my tongue. 
Finally, when I felt it was going to bleed from the pressure of my 
teeth, I said, “Carla, have you been noticing that four or five men 
have come over and smiled at you.” 

“Yes,” Carla whispered, her eyes darting nervously around the 
room lest anyone overhear us. 

“And you’ve been giving them little half smiles,” I continued. 

“Yes,” she murmured, now confused at my question. 

“Remember when little Willie came up and tugged on your 
skirt? Do you recall how you smiled that beautiful big smile of 
yours, turned toward him, and welcomed him into our grown-up 
conversation?” 



How to Win Their Heart by Responding to Their “Inner Infant” 25 


“Yee-es,” she answered haltingly. 

“Well, I have a request, Carla. I want you to give the next man 
who smiles at you that same big smile you gave Willie. I want you 
to turn toward him just like you did then. Maybe even reach out 
and touch his arm like you did Willie’s, and then welcome him 
into our conversation.” 

“Oh Leil, I couldn’t do that.” 

“Carla, do it!” Sure enough, within a few minutes, another 
attractive man wandered our way and smiled. Carla played her role 
to perfection. She flashed her beautiful teeth, turned fully toward 
him, and said, “Hello, come join us.” He wasted no time accept¬ 
ing Carla’s invitation. 

After a few moments, I excused myself. Neither noticed my 
departure because they were in animated conversation. The last 
glimpse I had of my friend at the party was her floating out the 
door on the arm of her new friend. 

Just then the technique I call “The Big-Baby Pivot” was born. 
It is a skill that will help you win whatever your heart desires from 
whatever type of beasts you encounter in the social or corporate 
jungle. 




ECHNIQUE #5 

The Big-Baby Pivot 


Give everyone you meet The Big-Baby Pivot. The 
instant the two of you are introduced, reward your new 
acquaintance. Give the warm smile, the total-body 
turn, and the undivided attention you would give a tiny 
tyke who crawled up to your feet, turned a precious 
face up to yours, and beamed a big toothless grin. 
Pivoting too percent toward the new person shouts “I 
think you are very, very special.” 



26 How to Talk to Anyone 


Remember, buried deep inside everyone is a big baby who is 
rattling the crib, wailing out for recognition of how very special 
he or she is. 

The following technique reinforces the big baby’s suspicion 
that he or she is, indeed, the center of the universe. 



6 How to Make Someone 
Feel Like an Old Friend 
at Once 


A very wise man with the funny name of Zig 9 once told me, “Peo¬ 
ple don’t care how much you know until they know how much 
you care . . . about them.” Zig Ziglar is right. The secret to mak¬ 
ing people like you is showing how much you like them! 

Your body is a twenty-four-hour broadcasting station reveal¬ 
ing to anyone within eyeshot precisely how you feel at any given 
moment. Even if your Hang by Your Teeth posture is gaining their 
respect, your Flooding Smile and The Big-Baby Pivot are making 
them feel special, and your Sticky Eyes are capturing their hearts 
and minds, the rest of your body can reveal any incongruence. 
Every inch—from the crinkle of your forehead to the position of 
your feet—must give a command performance if you want to 
effectively present an “I care about you” attitude. 

Unfortunately, when meeting someone, our brains are in over¬ 
drive. Remember Shakespeare’s Julius Caesar'. He said of Cassius, 
he “has a lean and hungry look ... he thinks too much . . . such 
men are dangerous.” So it is with our brains when conversing with 
a new acquaintance. Our brains become lean. (Some of us are 
fighting off shyness. Others are frantically sizing up the situation.) 
And hungry. (We’re deciding what, if anything, we want from this 
potential relationship.) So we think too much instead of respond- 


27 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



28 How to Talk to Anyone 


ing with candid, unself-conscious friendliness. Such actions are 
dangerous to impending friendship, love, or commerce. 

When our bodies are shooting off ten thousand bullets of 
stimuli every second, a few shots are apt to misfire and reveal shy¬ 
ness or hidden hostility. We need a technique to ensure every shot 
aims right at the heart of our subject. We need to trick our bod¬ 
ies into reacting perfectly. 

To find it, let’s explore the only time we don’t need to worry 
about any shyness or negativity slipping out through our body lan¬ 
guage. It’s when we feel none. That happens when we’re chatting 
with close friends. When we see someone we love or feel com¬ 
pletely comfortable with, we respond warmly from head to toe 
without a thought. Our lips part happily. We step closer. Our arms 
reach out. Our eyes become soft and wide. Even our palms turn 
up and our bodies turn fully toward our dear friend. 

How to Trick Your Body into Doing 
Everything Right 

Here’s a visualization technique that accomplishes all that. It guar¬ 
antees that everyone you encounter will feel your warmth. I call 
it “Hello Old Friend.” 

When meeting someone, play a mental trick on yourself. In 
your mind’s eye, see him or her as an old friend, someone you had 
a wonderful relationship with years ago. But somehow you lost 
track of your friend. You tried so hard to find your good buddy, 
but there was no listing in the phone book. No information online. 
None of your mutual friends had a clue. 

Suddenly, WOW! What a surprise! After all those years, the 
two of you are reunited. You are so happy. 

That’s where the pretending stops. Obviously, you are not 
going to try to convince the new person that the two of you are 
really old friends. You are not going to hug and kiss and say, “Great 
to see you again!” or “How have you been all these years?” You 



How to Make Someone Feel Like an Old Friend at Once 29 


merely say, “Hello,” “How do you do,” “I am pleased to meet 
you.” But, inside, it’s a very different story. 

You will amaze yourself. The delight of rediscovery fills your 
face and buoys up your body language. I sometimes jokingly say 
if you were a light, you’d beam on the other person. If you were 
a dog, you’d be wagging your tail. You make this new person feel 
very special indeed. 




ECHNIQUE #6 

Hello Old Friend 


When meeting someone, imagine he or she is an old 
friend (an old customer, an old beloved, or someone 
else you had great affection for). How sad, the vicis¬ 
situdes of life tore you two asunder. But, holy mack¬ 
erel, now the party (the meeting, the convention) has 
reunited you with your long-lost old friend! 

The joyful experience starts a remarkable chain 
reaction in your body from the subconscious softening 
of your eyebrows to the positioning of your toes—and 
everything between. 


In my seminars, I first have people introduce themselves to 
another participant before they’ve learned the Hello Old Friend 
technique. The group chats as though at a pleasant semiformal 
gathering. Later I ask them to introduce themselves to another 
stranger, imagining they are old friends. The difference is extraor¬ 
dinary. When they’re using Hello Old Friend, the room comes 
alive. The atmosphere is charged with good feeling. The air 
sparkles with happier, high-energy people. They are standing 
closer, laughing more sincerely, and reaching out to one another. I 
feel like I’m attending a terrific bash that’s been going on for hours. 



50 How to Talk to Anyone 


Not a Word Need Be Spoken 

The Hello Old Friend technique even supersedes language. When¬ 
ever you’re traveling in countries where you don’t speak the native 
tongue, be sure to use it. If you find yourself with a group of peo¬ 
ple who are all speaking a language unknown to you, just imag¬ 
ine them to be a group of your old friends. Everything is fine 
except they momentarily forgot how to speak English. In spite of 
the fact you won’t understand a word, your whole body still 
responds with congeniality and acceptance. 

I’ve used the Hello Old Friend technique while traveling in 
Europe. Sometimes my English-speaking friends who live there 
tell me their European colleagues say I am the friendliest Ameri¬ 
can they’ve ever met. Yet, we’d never spoken a word between us! 


A Self-Fulfilling Prophecy 

An added benefit to the Hello Old Friend technique is it becomes a 
self-fulfilling prophecy. When you act as though you like someone, 
you start to really like them. An Adelphi University study called, 
appropriately, “Believing Another Likes or Dislikes You: Behaviors 
Making the Beliefs Come True” proved it. 10 Researchers told vol¬ 
unteers to treat unsuspecting subjects as though they liked them. 
When surveyed later, the results showed the volunteers wound up 
genuinely liking the subjects. The unsuspecting subjects were also 
surveyed. These respondents expressed much higher respect and 
affection for the volunteers who pretended they liked them. What 
it boils down to is love begets love, like begets like, respect begets 
respect. Use the Hello Old Friend technique and you will soon have 
many new “old friends” who wind up genuinely liking you. 

You now have all the basics to come across to everyone you 
meet as a Somebody, a friendly Somebody. But your job isn’t over 
yet. In addition to being liked, you want to appear credible, intel¬ 
ligent, and sure of yourself. Each of the next three techniques 
accomplishes one of those goals. 



7 How to Come Across 
as 100 Percent Credible 
to Everyone 

My friend Helen is a highly respected headhunter. She makes ter¬ 
rific hires for her clients and I once asked her the secret of her suc¬ 
cess. Helen replied, “Probably because I can almost always tell 
when an applicant is lying.” 

“How can you tell?” 

She said, “Well, just last week, I was interviewing a young 
woman for a position as marketing director for a small firm. 
Throughout the interview, the applicant had been sitting with her 
left leg crossed over her right. Her hands were comfortably rest¬ 
ing in her lap and she was looking directly at me. 

“I asked her salary. Without swerving her eyes from mine, she 
told me. I asked if she enjoyed her work. Still looking directly at 
me, she said, ‘yes.’ Then I asked her why she left her previous job. 

“At that point, her eyes fleetingly darted away before regain¬ 
ing eye contact with me.” Helen continued. “Then, while answer¬ 
ing my question, she shifted in her seat and crossed her right leg 
over her left. At one point, she put her hands up to her mouth.” 

Helen said, “That’s all I needed. With her words she was 
telling me she felt her ‘growth opportunities were limited at her 
previous firm.’ But her body told me she was not being entirely 
forthright.” 


3i 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



52 How to Talk to Anyone 


Helen went on to explain the young woman’s fidgeting alone 
wouldn’t prove she was lying. Nevertheless, it was enough, she said, 
that she wanted to pursue the subject further. 

“So I tested it.” Helen explained. “I changed the subject and 
went back to more neutral territory. I asked her about her goals 
for the future. Again, the girl stopped fidgeting. She folded her 
hands in her lap as she told me how she’d always wanted to work 
in a small company in order to have hands-on experience with 
more than one project. 

“Then I repeated my earlier question. I asked again if it was 
only the lack of growth opportunity that made her leave her pre¬ 
vious position. Sure enough, once again, the woman shifted in her 
seat and momentarily broke eye contact. As she continued talking 
about her last job, she started rubbing her forearm.” 

Helen continued to probe until she finally uncovered the 
truth. The applicant had been fired because of a nasty disagree¬ 
ment with the marketing director for whom she worked. 

Human resources professionals who interview applicants and 
police officers who interrogate suspected criminals are trained to 
detect lies. They know specifically what signals to look for. The 
rest of us, although not knowledgeable about specific clues to 
deceit, have a sixth sense when someone is not telling us the truth. 

Just recently a colleague of mine was considering hiring an in- 
house booking agent. After interviewing one fellow she said to me, 
“I don’t know. I don’t really think he has the success he claims.” 

“You think he’s lying to you?” I asked. 

“Absolutely. And the funny thing is I can’t tell why. He looked 
right at me. He answered all my questions directly. There was just 
something that didn’t seem right.” 

Employers often feel this way. They have a gut feeling about 
someone but they can’t put their finger on it. Because of that, 
many large companies turn to the polygraph, or lie detector, a 
mechanical apparatus designed to detect if someone is lying. 



How to Come Across as 100 Percent Credible to Everyone 33 


Banks, drugstores, and grocery stores rely heavily on it for pre¬ 
employment screening. The FBI, Justice Department, and most 
police departments have used the polygraph on suspects. Interest¬ 
ingly, the polygraph is not a lie detector at all! All the machine can 
do is detect fluctuations in our autonomic nervous system— 
changes in breathing patterns, sweating, flushing, heart rate, blood 
pressure, and other signs of emotional arousal. 

So is it accurate? Well, yes, often it is. Why? Because when 
the average person tells a lie, he or she is emotionally aroused and 
bodily changes do take place. When that happens, the individual 
might fidget. Experienced or trained liars, however, can fool the 
polygraph. 

Beware of the Appearance of Lying— 

Even When You’re Telling the Truth 

Problems arise for us when we are not lying but are feeling emo¬ 
tional or intimidated by the person with whom we are talking. A 
young man telling an attractive woman about his business success 
might shift his weight. A woman talking about her company’s 
track record to an important client could rub her neck. 

More problems arise out of the atmosphere. A businessman 
who doesn’t feel nervous at all could loosen his collar because the 
room is hot. A politician giving a speech outdoors could blink 
excessively because the air is dusty. Even though erroneous, these 
fidgety movements give the listeners the sense something just isn’t 
right or a gut feeling that the speaker is lying. 

Professional communicators, alert to this hazard, consciously 
squelch any signs anyone could mistake for shiftiness. They fix a 
constant gaze on the listener. They never put their hands on their 
faces. They don’t massage their arm when it tingles or rub their 
nose when it itches. They don’t loosen their collar when it’s hot or 
blink because it’s sandy. They don’t wipe away tiny perspiration 



54 How to Talk to Anyone 


beads in public or shield their eyes from the sun. They suffer 
because they know fidgeting undermines credibility. Consider the 
infamous September 25, i960, televised presidential debate 
between Richard Milhous Nixon and John Fitzgerald Kennedy. 
Political pundits speculate Nixon’s lack of makeup, his fidgeting, 
and mopping his brow on camera lost him the election. 

If you want to come across as an entirely credible Somebody, 
try to squelch all extraneous movement when your communica¬ 
tion counts. I call the technique “Limit the Fidget.” 


Zb 


ECHNIQUE #7 

Limit the Fidget 


Whenever your conversation really counts, let your nose 
itch, your ear tingle, or your foot prickle. Do not 
fidget, twitch, wiggle, squirm, or scratch. And above 
all, keep your paws away from your puss. Fiand 
motions near your face and all fidgeting can give your 
listener the gut feeling you’re fibbing. 


Now let’s tackle intelligence. “What?” you ask. “Can people 
come across as more intelligent than they really are?” Well, did 
you ever hear of Hans, the counting horse? Hans was considered 
the most intelligent horse in history, and he used the technique 
I’m about to suggest. 



* How to Read People 
Like You Have ESP 


Hans, a very clever horse, inspires this next technique. Hans was 
owned by Herr von Osten, a Berliner, who had trained Hans to 
do simple arithmetic by tapping his right front hoof. So prodigious 
was Hans’s ability that the horse’s fame quickly spread throughout 
Europe in the early 1900s. He became known as Clever Hans, the 
counting horse. 

Herr von Osten taught Hans to do more than just add. Soon 
the horse could subtract and divide. In time, Clever Hans even 
mastered the multiplication tables. The horse became quite a phe¬ 
nomenon. Without his owner uttering a single word, Hans could 
count out the size of his audience, tap the number wearing glasses, 
or respond to any counting question they asked him. 

Finally, Hans achieved the ultimate ability that separates man 
from animal—language. Hans “learned” the alphabet. By tapping 
out hoof beats for each letter, he answered any question about any¬ 
thing humans had read in a newspaper or heard on the radio. He 
could even answer common questions about history, geography, 
and human biology. 

Hans made headlines and was the main topic of discussion at 
dinner parties throughout Europe. The “human horse” quickly 
attracted the attention of scientists, psychology professors, veteri- 


35 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



5 6 How to Talk to Anyone 


narians, even cavalry officers. Naturally they were skeptical, so 
they established an official commission to decide whether the horse 
was a case of clever trickery or equine genius. Whatever their sus¬ 
picions, it was obvious to all, Hans was a very smart horse. Com¬ 
pared to other horses, Hans was a Somebody. 

Cut to today. Why is it when you talk with certain individu¬ 
als you just know they are smarter than other people—that they 
are a Somebody? Often they’re not discussing highfalutin subjects 
or using two-dollar words. Nevertheless, everybody knows. Peo¬ 
ple say, “She’s smart as a whip,” “He doesn’t miss a trick,” “She 
picks up on everything,” “He’s got the right stuff,” “She’s got horse 
sense.” Which brings us back to Hans. 

The day of the big test arrived. Everyone was convinced it 
must be a trick orchestrated by Herr von Osten, Hans’s owner. It 
was standing room only in the auditorium filled with scientists, 
reporters, clairvoyants, psychics, and horse lovers who eagerly 
awaited the answer. The canny commission members were con¬ 
fident this was the day they would expose Hans as chicanery 
because they, too, had a trick up their sleeves. They were going 
to bar von Osten from the hall and put his horse to the test all 
alone. 

When the crowd was assembled, they told von Osten he must 
leave the auditorium. The surprised owner departed, and Hans 
was stranded in an auditorium with a suspicious and anxious 
audience. 

The confident commission leader asked Hans the first math¬ 
ematical question. He tapped out the right answer! A second. He 
got it right! Then a third. Then the language questions followed. 
He got them all right! 

The commission was befuddled. The critics were silenced. 

However, the public wasn’t. With a great outcry, they insisted 
on a new commission. The world waited while, once again, the 
authorities gathered scientists, professors, veterinarians, cavalry 
officers, and reporters from around the world. 



How to Read People Like You Have ESP 37 


Only after this second commission put Hans to the test did 
the truth about the clever horse come out. Commission number 
two started the enquiry perfunctorily with a simple addition prob¬ 
lem. This time, however, instead of asking the question out loud 
for all to hear, one researcher whispered a number in Hans’s ear, 
and a second researcher whispered another. Everyone expected 
Hans to quickly tap out the sum. But Hans remained dumb! Aha! 
The researchers revealed the truth to the waiting world. Can you 
guess what that was? 

Here’s a hint: when the audience or researcher knew the 
answer, Hans did, too. Now can you guess? 

People gave off very subtle body-language signals the moment 
Hans’s hoof gave the right number of taps. When Hans started 
tapping the answer to a question, the audience would show sub¬ 
tle signs of tension. Then, when Hans reached the right number, 
they responded by an expulsion of breath or slight relaxation of 
muscles. Von Osten had trained Hans to stop tapping at that point 
and therefore appear to give the right answer. 

Hans was using the technique I call “Hans’s Horse Sense.” He 
watched his audiences’ reactions very carefully and planned his 
responses accordingly. 

If a Horse Can Do It, So Can You 

Have you ever been watching TV when the phone rings? Someone 
asks you to hit the mute button on the television so they can talk. 
Because there’s no sound now, you watch the TV action more care¬ 
fully. You see performers smiling, scowling, smirking, squinting, 
and scores of other expressions. You don’t miss a bit of the story 
because, just from their expressions, you can tell what they’re think¬ 
ing. Hans’s Horse Sense is just that—watching people, seeing how 
they’re reacting, and then making your moves accordingly. Even 
while you’re talking, keep your eyes on your listeners and watch how 
they’re responding to what you’re saying. Don’t miss a trick. 



58 How to Talk to Anyone 


Are they smiling? Are they nodding? Are their palms up? They 
like what they’re hearing. 

Are they frowning? Are they looking away? Are their knuck¬ 
les clenched? Maybe they don’t. 

Are they rubbing their necks? Are they stepping back? Are 
their feet pointing toward the door? Maybe they want to get away. 

You don’t need a complete course in body language here. 
Already your life’s experience has given you a good grounding in 
that. Most people know if their conversation partners step back or 
look away, they’re not interested in what you’re saying. When they 
think you’re a pain in the neck they rub theirs. When they feel 
superior to you, they steeple their hands. 

We’ll explore more body-language specifics in Technique #77: 
Eyeball Selling. For the moment, all you need to do is tune to the 
silent channel being broadcast by the speaker. 


4 * 


ECHNIQUE #8 

Hans’s Horse Sense 


Make it a habit to get on a dual track while talking. 
Express yourself, but keep a keen eye on how your 
listener is reacting to what you’re saying. Then plan 
your moves accordingly. 

If a horse can do it, so can a human. People will say 
you pick up on everything. You never miss a trick. 
You’ve got horse sense. 


You now have eight techniques to help you come across as a 
confident, credible, and charismatic person who makes everyone 
he or she comes in contact with feel like a million. Let’s explore 
one last technique in this section to put it all together and make 
sure you don’t miss a beat. 



9y How to Make 
Sure You Don’t Miss 
a Single Beat 


You’ve seen professional skiing on television? The athlete at the top 
of the piste, every muscle primed and poised, waiting for the gun 
to propel him to ultimate victory. Look deeply into his eyes and 
you’ll see he is having an out-of-body experience. In his mind’s 
eye, the skier is swooshing down the slope, zapping back and forth 
between the poles, and sliding across the finish line in faster time 
than the world thought possible. The athlete is visualizing. 

All athletes do it: divers, runners, jumpers, javelin throwers, 
lugers, swimmers, skaters, acrobats. They visualize their magic 
before performing it. They see their own bodies bending, twist¬ 
ing, flipping, or flying through the air. They hear the sound of the 
wind, the splash in the water, the whirr of the javelin, the thud of 
its landing. They smell the grass, the cement, the pool, the dust. 
Before they move a muscle, professional athletes watch the whole 
movie, which, of course, ends in their own victory. 

Sports psychologists tell us visualization is not just for top- 
level competitive athletes. Studies show mental rehearsal helps 
weekend athletes sharpen their golf, their tennis, their running, 
whatever their favorite activity. Experts agree if you see the pic¬ 
tures, hear the sounds, and feel the movements of your body in 
your mind before you do the activity, the effect is powerful. 


39 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



40 How to Talk to Anyone 


“Twenty-Six Miles on My Mattress” 

Psychological mumbo jumbo? Absolutely not! My friend Richard 
runs marathons. Once, several years ago, a scant three weeks 
before the big New York marathon, an out-of-control car crashed 
into Richard’s and he was taken to the hospital. He was not badly 
injured. Nevertheless, his friends felt sorry for him because being 
laid up two weeks in bed would, naturally, knock him out of the 
big event. 

What a surprise when, on that crisp November marathon 
morning in Central Park, Richard showed up in his little shorts 
and big running shoes. 

“Richard, are you crazy? You’re in no shape to run. You’ve 
been in bed these past few weeks!” we all cried out. 

“My body may have been in bed,” he replied, “but I’ve been 
running.” 

“What?” we asked in unison. 

“Yep. Every day. Twenty-six miles, 385 yards, right there on 
my mattress.” Richard explained that in his imagination he saw 
himself traversing every step of the course. He saw the sights, 
heard the sounds, and felt the twitching movements in his mus¬ 
cles. He visualized himself racing in the marathon. 

Richard didn’t do as well as he had the year before, but the 
miracle is he finished the marathon, without injury, without exces¬ 
sive fatigue thanks to his visualization. It works in just about any 
endeavor you apply it to—including being a terrific communicator. 

Visualization works best when you feel totally relaxed. Only 
when you have a calm state of mind can you get clear, vivid 
images. Do your visualization in the quiet of your home or car 
before leaving for the party, the convention, or the big-deal meet¬ 
ing. See it all in your mind’s eye ahead of time. 

You now have the skills necessary to get you started on the 
right foot with any new person in your life. Think of yourself in 



How to Make Sure You Don’t Miss a Single Beat 41 




ECHNIQUE #9 

Watch the Scene Before You Make the Scene 


Rehearse being the Super Somebody you want to be 
ahead of time. SEE yourself walking around with Hang 
by Your Teeth posture, shaking hands, smiling the 
Flooding Smile, and making Sticky Eyes. HEAR your¬ 
self chatting comfortably with everyone. FEEL the 
pleasure of knowing you are in peak form and everyone 
is gravitating toward you. VISUALIZE yourself a Super 
Somebody. Then it all happens automatically. 


these first moments like a rocket taking off. When the folks at 
Cape Kennedy aim a spacecraft for the moon, a mistake in the 
millionth of a degree at the beginning, when the craft is still on 
the ground, means missing the moon by thousands of miles. Like¬ 
wise, a tiny body-language blooper at the outset of a relationship 
may mean you will never make a hit with that person. But with 
The Flooding Smile, Sticky Eyes, Epoxy Eyes, Hang by Your 
Teeth, The Big-Baby Pivot, Hello Old Friend, Limit the Fidget, 
Hans’s Horse Sense, and Watch the Scene Before You Make the 
Scene, you’ll be right on course to get whatever you eventually 
want from anybody—be it business, friendship, or love. 

We now move from the silent world to the spoken word. 



This page intentionally left blank. 



PART TWO 

How to Know What 
to Say After You 
Say “Hi” 


Just as the first glimpse should please their eyes, your first words 
should delight their ears. Your tongue is a welcome mat embossed 
with either “Welcome” or “Go Away!” To make your conversation 
partner feel welcome, you must master small talk. 

Small talk! Can you hear the shudder? Those two little words 
drive a stake into the hearts of some otherwise fearless and 
undaunted souls. Invite them to a party where they don’t know 
anyone, and it mainlines queasiness into their veins. 

If this sounds familiar, take consolation from the fact that the 
brighter the individual, the more he or she detests small talk. 
When consulting for Fortune 500 companies, I was astounded. 
Top executives, completely comfortable making big talk with their 
boards of directors or addressing their stockholders, confessed they 
felt like little lost children at parties where the pratter was less than 
prodigious. 

Small-talk haters take further consolation from the fact that 
you are in star-studded company. Fear of small talk and stage 
fright are the same thing. The butterflies you feel in your stom¬ 
ach when you’re in a roomful of strangers flutter ’round the turn¬ 
ed 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



44 How to Talk to Anyone 


mies of top performers. Pablo Casals complained of lifelong stage 
fright. Carly Simon curtailed live performances because of it. A 
friend of mine who worked with Neil Diamond said he insisted 
the words to “Song Sung Blue,” a tune he’d been crooning for forty 
years, be displayed on his teleprompter, lest fear freeze him into 
forgetfulness. 


Is Small-Talk-a-Phobia Curable? 

Someday, scientists say, communications fears may be treatable 
with drugs. They’re already experimenting with Prozac to change 
people’s personalities. But some fear disastrous side effects. The 
good news is that when human beings think, and genuinely feel, 
certain emotions—like confidence that they have specific tech¬ 
niques to fall back on—the brain manufactures its own antidotes. 
If fear and distaste of small talk is the disease, knowing solid tech¬ 
niques like the ones we explore in this section is the cure. 

Incidentally, science is beginning to recognize it’s not chance 
or even upbringing that one person has a belly of butterflies and 
another doesn’t. In our brains, neurons communicate through 
chemicals called neurotransmitters. Some people have excessive 
levels of a neurotransmitter called norepinephrine, a chemical 
cousin of adrenaline. For some children, just walking into a kinder¬ 
garten room makes them want to run and hide under a table. 

As a tot, I spent a lot of time under the table. As a preteen in 
an all-girls boarding school, my legs turned to linguine every time 
I had to converse with a male. In eighth grade, I once had to invite 
a boy to our school prom. The entire selection of dancing males 
lived in the dormitory of our brother school. And I only knew one 
resident, Eugene. I had met Eugene at summer camp the year 
before. Mustering all my courage, I decided to call him. 

Two weeks before the dance, I felt the onset of sweaty palms. 
I put the call off. One week before, rapid heartbeat set in. I put 



How to Know What to Say After You Say “Hi ” 45 


the call off. Finally, three days before the big bash, breathing 
became difficult. Time was running out. 

The critical moment, I rationalized, would be easier if I read 
from a script. I wrote out the following: “Hi, this is Leil. We met 
at camp last summer. Remember?” (I programmed in a pause 
where I hoped he would say “yes.”) “Well, National Cathedral 
School’s prom is this Saturday night and I’d like you to be my 
date.” (I programmed in another pause where I prayed he’d say 
“yes.”) 

On Thursday before the dance, I could no longer delay the 
inevitable. I picked up the receiver and dialed. Clutching the 
phone waiting for Eugene to answer, my eyes followed perspira¬ 
tion droplets rolling down my arm and dripping off my elbow. A 
small salty puddle was forming around my feet. “Hello?” a sexy, 
deep male voice answered the dorm phone. 

In faster-than-a-speeding-bullet voice, like a nervous novice 
telemarketer, I shot out, “Hi, this is Leil. We-met-at-camp—last- 
summer-remember?” Forgetting to pause for his assent, I raced on, 
“Well-National-Cathedral-School’s-prom-is-this-Saturday-night- 
and-I’d-like-you-to-be-my-date.” 

To my relief and delight, I heard a big, cheerful “Oh that’s 
great, I’d love to!” I exhaled my first normal breath all day. He con¬ 
tinued, “I’ll pick you up at the girl’s dorm at 7:30. I’ll have a pink 
carnation for you. Will that go with your dress? And my name is 
Donnie.” 

Donnie? Donnie! Who said anything about Donnie? 

Well, Donnie turned out to be the best date I had that decade. 
Donnie had buckteeth, a head full of tousled red hair, and com¬ 
munications skills that immediately put me at ease. 

On Saturday night, Donnie greeted me at the door, carnation 
in hand and grin on face. He joked self-deprecatingly about how 
he was dying to go to the prom so, knowing it was a case of mis¬ 
taken identity, he accepted anyway. He told me he was thrilled 



46 How to Talk to Anyone 


when “the girl with the lovely voice” called, and he took full 
responsibility for “tricking” me into an invitation. Donnie made 
me comfortable and confident as we chatted. First we made small 
talk and then he gradually led me into subjects I was interested in. 
I flipped over Donnie, and he became my very first boyfriend. 

Donnie instinctively had the small-talk skills that we are now 
going to fashion into techniques to help you glide through small 
talk like a hot knife through butter. When you master them, you 
will be able—like Donnie—to melt the heart of everyone you 
touch. 

The goal of How to Talk to Anyone is not, of course, to make 
you a small-talk whiz and stop there. The aim is to make you a 
dynamic conversationalist and forceful communicator. However, 
small talk is the first crucial step toward that goal. 




How to Start Great 
Small Talk 


You’ve been there. You’re introduced to someone at a party or busi¬ 
ness meeting. You shake hands, your eyes meet. . . and suddenly 
your entire body of knowledge dries up and thought processes 
come to a screeching halt. You fish for a topic to fill the awkward 
silence. Failing, your new contact slips away in the direction of the 
cheese tray. 

We want the first words falling from our lips to be sparkling, 
witty, and insightful. We want our listeners to immediately rec¬ 
ognize how riveting we are. I was once at a gathering where every¬ 
body was sparkling, witty, insightful, and riveting. It drove me 
berserk because most of these same everybodies felt they had to 
prove it in their first ten words or less! 

Several years ago, the Mensa organization, a social group of 
extremely bright individuals who score in the country’s top 2 per¬ 
cent in intelligence, invited me to be a keynote speaker at their 
annual convention. Their cocktail party was in full swing in the 
lobby of the hotel as I arrived. After checking in, I hauled my bags 
through the hoard of happy-hour Mensans to the elevator. The 
doors separated and I stepped into an elevator packed with party 
goers. As we began the journey up to our respective floors, the ele¬ 
vator gave several sleepy jerks. 


47 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



48 How to Talk to Anyone 


“Hmm,” I remarked, in response to the elevator’s sluggish¬ 
ness, “the elevator seems a little flaky.” Suddenly, each elevator 
occupant, feeling compelled to exhibit his or her 132-plus IQ, 
pounced forth with a thunderous explanation. “It’s obviously got 
poor rail-guide alignment,” announced one. “The relay contact is 
not made up,” declared another. Suddenly I felt like a grasshop¬ 
per trapped in a stereo speaker. I couldn’t wait to escape the attack 
of the mental giants. 

Afterward, in the solitude of my room, I thought back and 
reflected that the Mensans’ answers were, indeed, interesting. Why 
then did I have an adverse reaction? I realized it was too much, 
too soon. I was tired. Their high energy and intensity jarred my 
sluggish state. 

You see, small talk is not about facts or words. It’s about music, 
about melody. Small talk is about putting people at ease. It’s about 
making comforting noises together like cats purring, children 
humming, or groups chanting. You must first match your listener’s 
mood. 

Like repeating the note on the music teacher’s harmonica, top 
communicators pick up on their listener’s tone of voice and dupli¬ 
cate it. Instead of jumping in with such intensity, the Mensans 
could have momentarily matched my lethargic mood by saying, 
“Yes, it is slow, isn’t it?” Had they then prefaced their information 
with, “Have you ever been curious why an elevator is slow?” I 
would have responded with a sincere “Yes, I have.” After a moment 
of equalized energy levels, I would have welcomed their explana¬ 
tions about the rail-guard alignment or whatever the heck it was. 
And friendships might have started. 

I’m sure you’ve suffered the aggression of a mood mismatch. 
Have you ever been relaxing when some overexcited, hot-breathed 
colleague starts pounding you with questions? Or the reverse: 
you’re late, rushing to a meeting, when an associate stops you and 
starts lazily narrating a long, languorous story. No matter how 
interesting the tale, you don’t want to hear it now. 



How to Start Great Small Talk 49 


The first step in starting a conversation without strangling it 
is to match your listener’s mood, if only for a sentence or two. 
When it comes to small talk, think music, not words. Is your lis¬ 
tener adagio or allegro? Match that pace. I call it “Make a Mood 
Match.” 

Matching Their Mood Can Make 
or Break the Sale 

Matching customers’ moods is crucial for salespeople. Some years 
ago, I decided to throw a surprise party for my best friend Stella. 
It was going to be a triple-whammy party because she was cele¬ 
brating three events. One, it was Stella’s birthday. Two, she was 
newly engaged. And three, Stella had just landed her dream job. 
She had been my buddy since grade school, and I was floating on 
air over her birthday-engagement-congratulations bash. 

I had heard one of the best French restaurants in town had an 
attractive back room for parties. About 5 p.m. one afternoon, I 
wafted happily into the restaurant and found the seated maitre d’ 
languidly looking over his reservation book. I began excitedly bab¬ 
bling about Stella’s triple-whammy celebration and asked to see 
that fabulous back room I’d heard so much about. Without a smile 
or moving a muscle, he said, “Zee room ees een zee back. You can 
go zee eet eef you like.” 

CRAST 1 . What a party pooper! His morose mood kicked all 
the party spirit out of me, and I no longer wanted to rent his stu¬ 
pid space. Before I even looked at the room, he lost the rental. I 
left his restaurant vowing to find a place where the management 
would at least appear to share the joy of the happy occasion. 

Every mother knows this instinctively. To quiet a whimpering 
infant, Mama doesn’t just shake her finger and shout, “Quiet 
down.” No, Mama picks baby up. Mama cries, “Ooh, ooh, oh,” 
sympathetically matching baby’s misery for a few moments. Mama 
then gradually transitions the two of them into hush-hush happy 



50 How to Talk to Anyone 


sounds. Your listeners are all big babies! Match their mood if you 
want them to stop crying, start buying, or otherwise come ’round 
to your way of thinking. 




ECHNIQUE #IO 

Make a Mood Match 


Before opening your mouth, take a “voice sample” of 
your listener to detect his or her state of mind. Take a 
“psychic photograph” of the expression to see if your 
listener looks buoyant, bored, or blitzed. If you ever 
want to bring people around to your thoughts, you 
must match their mood and voice tone, if only for a 
moment. 



II How to Sound Like 
You’ve Got a Super 
Personality (No Matter 
What You’re Saying!) 


Once while at a party, I spotted a fellow surrounded by a fan club 
of avid listeners. The chap was smiling, gesticulating, and obvi¬ 
ously enthralling his audience. I went over to hearken to this fas¬ 
cinating speaker. I joined his throng of admirers and eavesdropped 
for a minute or two. Suddenly, it dawned on me: the fellow was 
saying the most banal things! His script was dull, dull, dull. Ah, 
but he was delivering his prosaic observations with such passion, 
and therefore, he held the group spellbound. It convinced me that 
it’s not all what you say, it’s how you say it. 

“What’s a Good Opening Line When 
I Meet People?” 

I am often asked this question, and I give them the same answer 
a woman who once worked in my office always gave me. Dottie 
often stayed at her desk to work through lunch. Sometimes, as I 
was leaving for the sandwich shop, I’d ask her, “Hey Dottie, what 
can I bring you back for lunch?” 


Si 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



5-2 How to Talk to Anyone 


Dottie, trying to be obliging, would say, “Oh anything is fine 
with me.” 

“No, Dottie!” I wanted to scream. “Tell me what you want. 
Ham ’n’ cheese on rye? Bologna on whole wheat, hold the mayo? 
Peanut butter ’n’ jelly with sliced bananas? Be specific. ‘Anything’ 
is a hassle.” 

Frustrating though it may be, my answer to the opening-line 
question is “Anything!” because almost anything you say really is 
OK—as long as it puts people at ease and sounds passionate. 

How do you put people at ease? By convincing them they are 
OK and that the two of you are similar. When you do that, you 
break down walls of fear, suspicion, and mistrust. 


Why Banal Makes a Bond 

Samuel I. Hayakawa was a college president, U.S. senator, and 
brilliant linguistic analyst of Japanese origin. He tells us this story 
that shows the value of, as he says, “unoriginal remarks.” 11 

In early 1943—after the attack on Pearl Harbor at a time when 
there were rumors of Japanese spies—Hayakawa had to wait sev¬ 
eral hours in a railroad station in Oshkosh, Wisconsin. He noticed 
others waiting in the station were staring at him suspiciously. 
Because of the war, they were apprehensive about his presence. He 
later wrote, “One couple with a small child was staring with spe¬ 
cial uneasiness and whispering to each other.” 

So what did Hayakawa do? He made unoriginal remarks to 
set them at ease. He said to the husband that it was too bad the 
train should be late on so cold a night. The man agreed. 

“I went on,” Hayakawa wrote, “to remark that it must be espe¬ 
cially difficult to travel with a small child in winter when train 
schedules were so uncertain. Again the husband agreed. I then 
asked the child’s age and remarked that their child looked very big 



How to Sound Like You’ve Got a Super Personality 53 


and strong for his age. Again agreement, this time with a slight 
smile. The tension was relaxing.” 

After two or three more exchanges, the man asked Hayakawa, 
“I hope you don’t mind my bringing it up, but you’re Japanese, aren’t 
you? Do you think the Japs have any chance of winning this war?” 

“Well,” Hayakawa replied, “your guess is as good as mine. I 
don’t know any more than I read in the papers. But the way I fig¬ 
ure it, I don’t see how the Japanese, with their lack of coal and 
steel and oil . . . can ever beat a powerfully industrialized nation 
like the United States.” 

Hayakawa went on, “My remark was admittedly neither orig¬ 
inal nor well informed. Hundreds of radio commentators . . . were 
saying much the same thing during those weeks. But just because 
they were, the remark sounded familiar and was on the right side 
so that it was easy to agree with.” 

The Wisconsin man agreed at once with what seemed like 
genuine relief. His next remark was, “Say, I hope your folks aren’t 
over there while the war is going on.” 

“Yes, they are,” Hayakawa replied. “My father and mother and 
two young sisters are over there.” 

“Do you ever hear from them?” the man asked. 

“How can I?” Hayakawa answered. 

Both the man and his wife looked troubled and sympathetic. 
“Do you mean you won’t be able to see them or hear from them 
until after the war is over?” 

There was more to the conversation but the result was, within 
ten minutes they had invited Hayakawa—whom they initially may 
have suspected was a Japanese spy—to visit them sometime in 
their city and have dinner in their home. And all because of this 
brilliant scholar’s admittedly common and unoriginal small talk. 
Top communicators know the most soothing and appropriate first 
words should be, like Senator Hayakawa’s, unoriginal, even banal. 



54 How to Talk to Anyone 


But not indifferent. Hayakawa delivered his sentiments with sin¬ 
cerity and passion. 


Ascent from Banality 

It is not necessary, of course, to stay with mundane remarks. If 
you find your company displays cleverness or wit, you match that. 
The conversation then escalates naturally, compatibly. Don’t rush 
it or, like the Mensans, you seem like you’re showing off. The bot¬ 
tom line on your first words is to have the courage of your own 
triteness. Because, remember, people tune in to your tone more 
than your text. 


4 ^ 


ECHNIQUE #11 

Prosaic with Passion 


Worried about your first words? Fear not, because 80 
percent of your listener’s impression has nothing to do 
with your words anyway. Almost anything you say at 
first is fine. No matter how prosaic the text, an 
empathetic mood, a positive demeanor, and passionate 
delivery make you sound exciting. 


“Anything, Except Liverwurst!” 

Back to Dottie waiting for her sandwich at her desk. Sometimes 
as I walked out the door scratching my head wondering what to 
bring her, she’d call after me, “Anything, except liverwurst, that 
is.” Thanks, Dottie, that’s a little bit of help. 

Here’s my “anything, except liverwurst” on small talk. Any¬ 
thing you say is fine as long as it is not complaining, rude, or 



How to Sound Like You’ve Got a Super Personality 55 


unpleasant. If the first words out of your mouth are a complaint— 
BLAM—people label you a complainer. Why? Because that com¬ 
plaint is your new acquaintance’s too percent sampling of you so 
far. You could be the happiest Pollyanna ever, but how will they 
know? If your first comment is a complaint, you’re a griper. If your 
first words are rude, you’re a creep. If your first words are unpleas¬ 
ant, you’re a stinker. Open and shut. 

Other than these downers, anything goes. Ask them where 
they’re from, how they know the host of the party, where they 
bought the lovely suit they’re wearing—or hundreds of etceteras. 
The trick is to ask your prosaic question with passion to get the 
other person talking. 

Still feel a bit shaky on making the approach to strangers? Let’s 
take a quick detour on our road to meaningful communicating. 
I’ll give you three quickie techniques to meet people at parties— 
then nine more to make small talk not so small. 



12 How to Make People 
Want to Start a 
Conversation with You 


Singles proficient at meeting potential sweethearts without the 
benefit of introduction (in the vernacular, making a “pickup”), 
have developed a deliciously devious technique that works equally 
well for social or corporate networking purposes. The technique 
requires no exceptional skill on your part, only the courage to 
sport a simple visual prop called a “Whatzit.” 

What’s a Whatzit? A Whatzit is anything you wear or carry 
that is unusual—a unique pin, an interesting purse, a strange tie, 
or an amusing hat. A Whatzit is any object that draws people’s 
attention and inspires them to approach you and ask, “Uh, what’s 
that?” Your Whatzit can be as subtle or overt as your personality 
and the occasion permit. 

I wear around my neck an outmoded pair of glasses that resem¬ 
bles a double monocle. Often the curious have approached me at a 
gathering and asked, “Whatzit?” I explain it’s a lorgnette left to me 
by my grandmother, which, of course, paves the way to discuss 
hatred of glasses, aging eyes, love or loss of grandmothers, adora¬ 
tion of antique jewelry—anywhere the inquisitor wants to take it. 

Perhaps, unknowingly, you have fallen prey to this soon-to- 
be-legendary technique. At a gathering, have you ever noticed 


56 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



Hoiv to Make People Want to Start a Conversation with Yon $7 


someone you would like to talk to? Then you’ve racked your brain 
to conjure an excuse to make the approach. What a bounty it was 
to discover that he or she was wearing some weird, wild, or won¬ 
derful something you could comment on. 


The Whatzit Way to Love 

Your Whatzit is a social aid whether you seek business rewards or 
new romance. My friend Alexander carries Greek worry beads 
with him wherever he goes. He’s not worried. He knows any 
woman who wants to talk to him will come up and say, “What’s 
that?” 

Think about it, gentlemen. Suppose you’re at a party. An 
attractive woman spots you across the room. She wants to talk to 
you but she’s thinking, “Well, Mister, you’re attractive. But, golly, 
what can I say to you? You just ain’t got no Whatzit.” 


Be a Whatzit Seeker, Too 

Likewise, become proficient in scrutinizing the apparel of those 
you wish to approach. Why not express interest in the handker¬ 
chief in the tycoon’s vest pocket, the brooch on the bosom of the 
rich divorcee, or the school ring on the finger of the CEO whose 
company you want to work for? 

The big spender who, you suspect, might buy a hundred of 
your widgets has a tiny golf-club lapel pin? Say, “Excuse me, I 
couldn’t help but notice your attractive lapel pin. Are you a golfer? 
Me, too. What courses have you played?” 

Your business cards and your Whatzit are crucial socializing 
artifacts. Whether you are riding in the elevator, climbing the 
doorstep, or traversing the path to the party, make sure your 
Whatzit is hanging out for all to see. 



58 How to Talk to Anyone 


2ji 


ECHNIQUE #12 

Always Wear a Whatzit 


Whenever you go to a gathering, wear or carry 
something unusual to give people who find you the 
delightful stranger across the crowded room an excuse 
to approach. “Excuse me, I couldn’t help but notice 
your . . . what IS that?” 


The next quickie technique was originated by doggedly de¬ 
termined politicians who don’t let one partygoer escape if they 
think he or she could be helpful to their campaigns. I call it the 
“Whoozat” technique. 



i3 How to Meet the 
People You Want 
to Meet 


Say you have scrutinized the body of the important business con¬ 
tact you want to meet. You’ve searched in vain from the tip of his 
cowlick to the toes of his boots. He’s not sporting a single Whatzit. 

If you strike out on finding something to comment on, resort 
to the Whoozat technique. Like a persistent politician, go to the 
party giver and say, “That man/woman over there looks interest¬ 
ing. Who is he/she?” Then ask for an introduction. Don’t be hes¬ 
itant. The party giver will be pleased you find one of the guests 
interesting. 

If, however, you are loath to pull the party giver away from 
his or her other guests, you still can perform Whoozat. This time, 
don’t ask for a formal introduction. Simply pump the party giver 
for just enough information to launch you. Find out about the 
stranger’s jobs, interests, and hobbies. 

Suppose the party giver says, “Oh, that’s Joe Smith. I’m not 
sure what his job is, but I know he loves to ski.” Aha, you’ve just 
been given the icebreaker you need. Now you make a beeline for 
Joe Smith. “Hi, you’re Joe Smith, aren’t you? Susan was just telling 
me what a great skier you are. Where do you ski?” You get the 
idea. 


59 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



60 How to Talk to Anyone 


th 


ECHNIQUE #13 

Whoozat 


Whoozat is the most effective, least used (by non¬ 
politicians) meeting-people device ever contrived. 
Simply ask the party giver to make the introduction, or 
pump for a few facts that you can immediately turn 
into icebreakers. 


Now the third in our little trio of meeting-who-you-want 
tricks. 




How to Break into a 
Tight Crowd 


The woman you’ve decided you MUST meet is wearing no 
Whatzit? Can’t find the host for the Whoozat technique? To make 
matters worse, she’s deep in conversation with a group of her 
friends. Seems quite hopeless that you will maneuver a meeting, 
doesn’t it? You can’t just say, “Excuse me, I just thought I’d eaves¬ 
drop in and say ‘Hello.’ ” 

No obstacle blocks the resolute politician, who always has a 
trick or ten up his or her sleeve. A politico would resort to the 
“Eavesdrop In” technique. Eavesdropping, of course, conjures 
images of clandestine activities—wiretapping, Watergate break- 
ins, or spies skulking around in the murky shadows. Eavesdrop¬ 
ping has historical precedent with politicians so, in a pinch, it 
naturally comes to mind. 

At parties, stand near the group of people you wish to infil¬ 
trate. Then wait for a word or two you can use as a wedge to break 
into the group. “Excuse me, I couldn’t help overhearing that you 
. . .” and then whatever is relevant here. For example “I couldn’t 
help overhearing your discussion of Bermuda. I’m going there next 
month for the first time. Any suggestions?” 

Now you are in the circle and can direct your comments to 
your intended. 


61 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



62 How to Talk to Anyone 


4 * 


ECHNIQUE #14 

Eavesdrop In 


No Whatzit? No host for Whoozat? No problem! Just 
sidle up behind the swarm of folks you want to infil¬ 
trate and open your ears. Wait for any flimsy excuse 
and jump in with “Excuse me, I couldn’t help but 
overhear. ...” 

Will they be taken aback? Momentarily. 

Will they get over it? Momentarily. 

Will you be in the conversation? Absolutely! 


Let us now hop back on the train that first explored Small Talk 
City and travel to the land of Meaningful Communicating. 



is How to Make “Where 
Are You From?” 
Sound Exciting 


You wouldn’t dream of going to a party naked. And I hope you 
wouldn’t dream of letting your conversation be exposed naked and 
defenseless against the two inevitable assaults “Where are you 
from?” and “What do you do?” 

When asked these questions, most people, like clunking a fro¬ 
zen steak on a china platter, drop a brick of frozen geography or 
baffling job title on the asker’s conversational platter. Then they 
slap on the muzzle. 

You’re at a convention. Everyone you meet will, of course, ask 
“And where are you from?” When you give them the short-form 
naked-city answer “Oh, I’m from Muscatine, Iowa” (or Milli- 
nocket, Maine; Winnemucca, Nevada; or anywhere they haven’t 
heard of), what can you expect except a blank stare? Even if you’re 
a relatively big city slicker from Denver, Colorado; Detroit, Michi¬ 
gan; or San Diego, California, you’ll receive a panicked look from 
all but American history professors. They’re rapidly racking their 
brains thinking “What do I say next?” Even the names of world- 
class burgs like New York, Chicago, Washington, and Los Ange¬ 
les inspire less-than-riveting responses. When I tell people I’m 
from New York City, what are they expected to say? “Duh, seen 
any good muggings lately?” 


63 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



64 How to Talk to Anyone 


Do humanity and yourself a favor. Never, ever, give just a one- 
sentence response to the question, “Where are you from?” Give the 
asker some fuel for his tank, some fodder for his trough. Give the hun¬ 
gry communicator something to conversationally nibble on. All it 
takes is an extra sentence or two about your city—some interesting 
fact, some witty observation—to hook the asker into the conversation. 

Several months ago, a trade association invited me to be its 
keynote speaker on networking and teaching people to be better 
conversationalists. Just before my speech, I was introduced to Mrs. 
Devlin, who was the head of the association. 

“How do you do?” she asked. 

“How do you do?” I replied. 

Then Mrs. Devlin smiled, anxiously awaiting a sample of my 
stimulating conversational expertise. I asked her where she was 
from. She plunked a frozen “Columbus, Ohio” and a big expectant 
grin on my platter. I had to quickly thaw her answer into digestible 
conversation. My mind thrashed into action. Leifs thought pat¬ 
tern: “Gulp, Columbus, Ohio. I’ve never been there, hmm. Crim- 
iny, what do I know about Columbus? I know a fellow named Jeff, 
a successful speaker who lives there. But Columbus is too big to 
ask if she knows him . . . and besides only kids play the ‘Do-you- 
know-so-and-so’ game.” My panicked silent search continued. “I 
think it’s named after Christopher Columbus . .. but I’m not sure, 
so I better keep my mouth shut on that one.” Four or five other 
possibilities raced through my mind but I rejected them all as too 
obvious, too adolescent, or too off-the-wall. 

I realized by now that seconds had passed, and Mrs. Devlin 
was still standing there with a slowly dissipating smile on her face. 
She was waiting for me (the “expert” who, within the hour, was 
expected to teach her trade association lessons on scintillating con¬ 
versation) to spew forth words of wit or wisdom. 

“Oh, Columbus, gee,” I mumbled in desperation, watching 
her face fall into the worried expression of a patient being asked 
by the surgeon, knife poised in hand, “Where’s your appendix?” 



How to Make “Where Are You From?” Sound Exciting 65 


I never came up with stimulating conversation on Columbus. 
But, just then, under the knife, I created the following technique 
for posterity. I call it “Never the Naked City.” 


Zb 


ECHNIQUE #15 

Never the Naked City 


Whenever someone asks you the inevitable, “And where 
are you from?” never, ever, unfairly challenge their 
powers of imagination with a one-word answer. 

Learn some engaging facts about your hometown 
that conversational partners can comment on. Then, 
when they say something clever in response to your 
bait, they think you’re a great conversationalist. 


Different Bait for Shrimp or Sharks 

A fisherman uses different bait to bag bass or bluefish. And you 
will obviously throw out different conversational bait to snag sim¬ 
ple shrimp or sophisticated sharks. Your hook should relate to the 
type of person you’re speaking with. I’m originally from Wash¬ 
ington, D.C. If someone at, say, an art gallery asked me where I 
was from, I might answer “Washington, D.C.—designed, you 
know, by the same city planner who designed Paris.” This opens 
the conversational possibilities to the artistry of city planning, 
Paris, other cities’ plans, European travel, and so forth. 

At a social party of singles I’d opt for another answer. “I’m 
from Washington, D.C. The reason I left is there were seven 
women to every man when I was growing up.” Now the conver¬ 
sation can turn to the ecstasy or agony of being single, the per¬ 
ceived lack of desirable men everywhere, or even flirtatious 
possibilities. 



66 How to Talk to Anyone 


In a political group, I’d cast a current fact from the constantly 
evolving political face of Washington. No need to speculate on the 
multitude of conversational possibilities that unlocks. 

Where do you get your conversational bait? Start by phoning 
the chamber of commerce or historical society of your town. 
Search the World Wide Web and click on your town, or open an 
old-fashioned encyclopedia—all rich sources for future stimulat¬ 
ing conversations. Learn some history, geography, business statis¬ 
tics, or perhaps a few fun facts to tickle future friends’ funny 
bones. 

The Devlin debacle inspired further research. The minute I 
got home, I called the Columbus chamber of commerce and the 
historical society. Say you, too, are from Columbus, Ohio, and 
your new acquaintance lays it on you: “Where are you from?” 
When you are talking with a businessperson, your answer could 
be, “I’m from Columbus, Ohio. You know many major corpora¬ 
tions do their product testing in Columbus because it’s so com¬ 
mercially typical. In fact, it’s been called ‘the most American city 
in America.’ They say if it booms or bombs in Columbus, it 
booms or bombs nationally.” 

Talking with someone with a German last name? Tell her 
about Columbus’s historic German Village with the brick streets 
and the wonderful i850s-style little houses. It’s bound to inspire 
stories of the old country. Your conversation partner’s surname is 
Italian? Tell him Genoa, Italy, is Columbus’s sister city. 

Talking with an American history buff? Tell him that Colum¬ 
bus was, indeed, named after Christopher Columbus and that a 
replica of the Santa Maria is anchored in the Scioto River. Talk¬ 
ing with a student? Tell her about the five universities in Columbus. 

The possibilities continue. You suspect your conversation part¬ 
ner has an artistic bent? “Ah,” you throw out casually, “Columbus 
is the home of artist George Bellows.” 

Columbusites, prepare some tasty snacks for askers even if 
you know nothing about them. Here’s a goodie. Tell them you 



How to Make “Where Are You From?”Sound. Exciting 6y 


always have to say “Columbus, Ohio” because there is also a Co¬ 
lumbus, Arkansas; Columbus, Georgia; Columbus, Indiana; 
Columbus, Kansas; Columbus, Kentucky; Columbus, Mississippi; 
Columbus, Montana; Columbus, Nebraska; Columbus, New Jer¬ 
sey; Columbus, New Mexico; Columbus, North Carolina; Colum¬ 
bus, North Dakota; Columbus, Pennsylvania; Columbus, Texas; 
and Columbus, Wisconsin. That spreads the conversational possi¬ 
bilities to fifteen other states. Remember, as a quotable notable once 
said, “No man would listen to you talk if he didn’t know it was his 
turn next.” 

A postscript to the hellish experience I had with Columbus. 
Months later, I mentioned the trauma to my speaker friend from 
Columbus, Jeff. Jeff explained his house was really in a smaller 
town just minutes outside Columbus. 

“What town, Jeff?” 

“Gahanna, Ohio. Gahanna means ‘hell’ in Hebrew,” he said, 
and then went on to explain why he thought ancient Hebrew his¬ 
torians were clairvoyant. 

Thanks, Jeff, I knew you’d never lay a naked city on any of 
your listeners. 



rf How to Come Out a 
Winner Every Time 
They Ask, “And What 
Do You Do?” 

Third only to death and taxes is the assurance a new acquaintance 
will soon chirp, “And what do you do?” (Is it fitting and proper 
they should make that query? We’ll pick up that sticky wicket 
later.) For the moment, these few defensive moves help you keep 
your crackerjack communicator credentials when asked the 
inevitable question. 

First, like Never the Naked City, don’t toss a short-shrift 
answer in response to the asker’s breathless inquiry. You leave the 
poor fish flopping on the deck when you just say your title: “I’m 
an actuary/an auditor/an author/an astrophysicist.” Have mercy 
so he or she doesn’t feel like a nincompoop outsider asking, “What, 
er, kind of actuizing (auditing, authoring, or astrophysizing) do 
you do?” 

You’re an attorney. Don’t leave it to laymen to try to figure out 
what you really do. Flesh it out. Tell a little story your conversa¬ 
tion partner can get a handle on. For example, if you’re talking 
with a young mother say, “I’m an attorney. Our firm specializes in 
employment law. In fact, now I’m involved in a case where a com- 

68 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Come Out a Winner Every Time They Ask, “And What Do You Do?” 69 


-V. 


ECHNIQUE #l6 

Never the Naked Job 


When asked the inevitable “And what do you do,” you 
may think “I’m an economist/an educator/an engineer” 
is giving enough information to engender good 
conversation. However, to one who is not an economist, 
educator, or an engineer, you might as well be saying 
“I’m a paleontologist/psychoanalyst/pornographer.” 

Flesh it out. Throw out some delicious facts about 
your job for new acquaintances to munch on. 
Otherwise, they’ll soon excuse themselves, preferring 
the snacks back at the cheese tray. 


pany actually discharged a woman for taking extra maternity leave 
that was a medical necessity.” A mother can relate to that. 

Talking with a business owner? Say “I’m an attorney. Our firm 
specializes in employment law. My current case concerns an 
employer who is being sued by one of her staff for asking personal 
questions during the initial job interview.” A business owner can 
relate to that. 


Painful Memories of Naked Job Flashers 

I still harbor painful recollections of being tongue-tied when con¬ 
fronted by naked job flashers. Like the time a fellow at a dinner 
party told me, “I’m a nuclear scientist.” My weak “Oh, that must 
be fascinating” reduced me to a mental molecule in his eyes. 

The chap on my other side announced, “I’m in industrial abra¬ 
sives,” and then paused, waiting for me to be impressed. My “Well, 
er, golly, you must have to be a shrewd judge of character to be in 



jo How to Talk to Anyone 


industrial abrasives” didn’t fly either. We three sat in silence the 
rest of the meal. 

Just last month a new acquaintance bragged, “I’m planning to 
teach Tibetan Buddhism at Truckee Meadows Community Col¬ 
lege,” and then clammed up. I knew less about Truckee Meadows 
than I did about Tibetan Buddhism. Whenever people ask you 
what you do, give them some mouth-to-ear resuscitation so they 
can catch their breath and say something. 



j 7 How to Introduce People 
Like the Host(ess) with 
the Most(est) 


It is important to help “newlymets” through their first nervous 
moments. 

“Susan, I’d like you to meet John Smith. John, this is Susan 
Jones.” Duh, what do you expect John and Susan to say? 

“Smith? Umm, that’s S-M-I-T-H, isn’t it?” 

“Uh, er, golly, Susan, well, now, there’s an interesting name.” 

Nice-try-forget-it. Don’t blame John or Susan for being less 
than scintillating. The fault lies with the person who introduced 
the two the way most people introduce their friends to each 
other—with naked names. They cast out a line with no bait for 
people to sink their teeth into. 

Big winners may not talk a lot, but conversation never dies 
unwillingly in their midst. They make sure of it with techniques 
like “Never the Naked Introduction.” When they introduce peo¬ 
ple, they buy an insurance policy on the conversation with a few 
simple add-ons: “Susan, I’d like you to meet John. John has a won¬ 
derful boat we took a trip on last summer. John, this is Susan 
Smith. Susan is editor in chief of Shoestring Gourmet magazine.” 

Padding the introduction gives Susan the opportunity to ask 
what kind of boat John has or where the group went. It gives John 
an opening to discuss his love of writing. Or of cooking. Or of 


7i 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



72 How to Talk to Anyone 


food. The conversation can then naturally expand to travel in gen¬ 
eral, life on boats, past vacations, favorite recipes, restaurants, bud¬ 
gets, diets, magazines, editorial policy—to infinity. 




ECHNIQUE #17 

Never the Naked Introduction 


When introducing people, don’t throw out an unbaited 
hook and stand there grinning like a big clam, leaving 
the newlymets to flutter their fins and fish for a topic. 
Bait the conversational hook to get them in the swim of 
things. Then you’re free to stay or float on to the next 
networking opportunity. 


If you’re not comfortable mentioning someone’s job during 
the introduction, mention their hobby or even a talent. The other 
day at a gathering, the hostess introduced a man named Gilbert. 
She said, “Leil, I’d like you to meet Gilbert. Gilbert’s gift is sculpt¬ 
ing. He makes beautiful wax carvings.” I remember thinking, 
“ Gift —now that’s a lovely way to introduce someone and induce 
conversation.” 

Armed with these two personality enhancers, three conversa¬ 
tion igniters, and three small extenders, it is time to take a step up 
the communications ladder. Let us now rise from small talk and 
seek the path to more meaningful dialogue. The next technique 
is guaranteed to make the exchange engrossing for your conversa¬ 
tion partner. 




How to Resuscitate a 
Dying Conversation 


Even a well-intentioned husband who might ask his wife while 
making love, “Is it good for you, too, Honey?” knows not to ask 
a colleague, “Is the conversation good for you, too?” Yet he won¬ 
ders ... we all do. With the following technique, set your mind 
at rest. You can definitely make the conversation hot for anyone 
with whom you speak. Like my prom date, Donnie, you will 
miraculously find subjects to engross your listeners. 


Be a Sleuth on Their Slips of the Tongue 

No matter how elusive the clue, Sherlock Holmes is confident he’ll 
soon be staring right at it through his magnifying glass. Like 
the unerring detective, big winners know, no matter how elusive 
the clue, they’ll find the right topic. How? They become word 
detectives. 

I have a young friend, Nancy, who works in a nursing home. 
Nancy cares deeply about the elderly but often grumbles about 
how crotchety and laconic some of her patients are. She laments 
she has difficulty relating to them. 

Nancy told me about one especially cantankerous old woman 
named Mrs. Otis, whom she could never get to open up to her. 


75 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



74 - How to Talk to Anyone 


“One day,” Nancy confided, “right after all those rainstorms we 
had last week, just to make conversation, I remarked to Mrs. Otis, 
‘Terrible storms we had last week, don’t you think?’ Well,” Nancy 
continued, “Mrs. Otis practically jumped down my throat. She 
said in a snippy voice, ‘It’s been good for the plants.’” I asked 
Nancy how she responded to that. 

“What could I say?” Nancy answered. “The woman was obvi¬ 
ously cutting me off.” 

“Did you ever think to ask Mrs. Otis if she liked plants?” 

“Plants?” Nancy asked. 

“Well, yes,” I suggested. “Mrs. Otis brought the subject up.” 
I asked Nancy to do me a favor. “Ask her,” I begged. Nancy re¬ 
sisted, but I persisted. Just to quiet me down, Nancy promised to 
ask “cantankerous old Mrs. Otis” if she liked plants. 

The next day, a flabbergasted Nancy called me from work. 
“Led, how did you know? Not only did Mrs. Otis love plants, but 
she told me she’d been married to a gardener. Today I had a dif¬ 
ferent problem with Mrs. Otis. I couldn’t shut her up! She went 
on and on about her garden, her husband. . . .” 

Top communicators know ideas don’t come out of nowhere. 
If Mrs. Otis thought to bring up plants, then she must have some 
relationship with them. Furthermore, by mentioning the word, it 
meant subconsciously she wanted to talk about plants. 

Suppose, for example, instead of responding to Nancy’s com¬ 
ment about the rain with “It’s good for the plants,” Mrs. Otis had 
said, “Because of the rain, my dog couldn’t go out.” Nancy could 
then ask about her dog. Or suppose she grumbled, “It’s bad for my 
arthritis.” Can you guess what old Mrs. Otis wants to talk about 
now? 

When talking with anyone, keep your ears open and, like a 
good detective, listen for clues. Be on the lookout for any unusual 
references: any anomaly, deviation, digression, or invocation of 



How to Resuscitate a Dying Conversation y$ 


another place, time, person. Ask about it because it’s the clue to 
what your conversation partner would really enjoy discussing. 

If two people have something in common, when the shared 
interest comes up, they jump on it naturally. For example, if some¬ 
one mentions playing squash (bird-watching or stamp collecting) 
and the listener shares that passion, he or she pipes up, “Oh, you’re 
a squasher (or birder or philatelist), too!” 

Here’s the trick: there’s no need to be a squasher, birder, or 
philatelist to pipe up with enthusiasm. You can simply “Be a Word 
Detective.” When you pick up on the reference as though it excites 
you, too, it parlays you into conversation the stranger thrills to. 
(The subject may put your feet to sleep, but that’s another story.) 




ECHNIQUE #l8 

Be a Word Detective 


Like a good gumshoe, listen to your conversation 
partner’s every word for clues to his or her preferred 
topic. The evidence is bound to slip out. Then spring 
on that subject like a sleuth on to a slip of the tongue. 
Like Sherlock Holmes, you have the clue to the subject 
that’s hot for the other person. 


Now that you’ve ignited stimulating conversation, let’s explore 
a technique to keep it hot. 



i9 How to Enthrall ’Em 
with Your Choice of 
Topic-Them! 

Several years ago, a girlfriend and I attended a party saturated with 
a hodgepodge of swellegant folks. Everyone we talked to seemed 
to lead a nifty life. Discussing the party afterward, I asked my 
friend, “Diane, of all the exciting people at the party, who did you 
enjoy talking to most?” 

Without hesitation she said, “Oh by far, Dan Smith.” 

“What does Dan do?” I asked her. 

“Uh, well, I’m not sure,” she answered. 

“Where does he live?” 

“Uh, I don’t know,” Diane responded. 

“Well, what is he interested in?” 

“Well, we really didn’t talk about his interests.” 

“Diane,” I asked, “what did you talk about?” 

“Well, I guess we talked mostly about me.” 

“Aha,” I thought. Diane has just rubbed noses with a winner. 

As it turns out, I had the pleasure of meeting Big-Winner Dan 
several months later. Diane’s ignorance about his life piqued my 
curiosity so I grilled him for details. As it turns out, Dan lives in 
Paris, has a beach home in the south of France, and a mountain 
home in the Alps. He travels around the world producing sound and 
light shows for pyramids and ancient ruins—and he is an avid hang 

76 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Enthrall Em with Your Choice of Topic — Them! 77 


glider and scuba diver. Does this man have an interesting life or 
what? Yet Dan, when meeting Diane, said nothing about himself. 

I told Dan about how pleased Diane was to meet him yet how 
little she learned about his life. Dan simply replied, “Well, when 
I meet someone, I learn so much more if I ask about their life. I 
always try to turn the spotlight on the other person.” Truly con¬ 
fident people often do this. They know they grow more by listen¬ 
ing than talking. Obviously, they also captivate the talker. 


Sell Yourself with a Top Sales Technique 

Several months ago at a speaker’s convention, I was talking with 
a colleague Brian Tracy. Brian does a brilliant job of training top 
salespeople. He tells his students of a giant spotlight that, when 
shining on their product, is not as interesting to the prospect. 
When they shine the spotlight on the prospect, they make the sale. 

Salespeople, this technique is especially crucial for you. Keep 
your “Swiveling Spotlight” aimed away from you, only lightly on 
your product, and most brightly on your buyer. You’ll do a much 
better job of selling yourself and your product. 




ECHNIQUE #19 

The Swiveling Spotlight 


When you meet someone, imagine a giant revolving 
spotlight between you. When you’re talking, the 
spotlight is on you. When the new person is speaking, 
it’s shining on him or her. If you shine it brightly 
enough, the stranger will be blinded to the fact that you 
have hardly said a word about yourself. The longer you 
keep it shining away from you, the more interesting he 
or she finds you. 



20 How to Never Need 
to Wonder, “What Do 
I Say Next?” 


Moments arise, of course, when even conversationalists extraordi¬ 
naire hit the wall. Some folks’ monosyllabic grunts leave slim pick¬ 
ings even for masters of the Be a Word Detective technique. 

If you find yourself futilely fanning the embers of a dying 
conversation (and if you feel for political reasons or human com¬ 
passion that the conversation should continue), here’s a foolproof 
trick to get the fire blazing again. I call it “Parroting” after that 
beautiful tropical bird that captures everyone’s heart simply by 
repeating other people’s words. 

Have you ever, puttering around the house, had the TV in the 
background tuned to a tennis game? You hear the ball going back 
and forth over the net—klink-klunk, klink-klunk, klink . . . this 
time you don’t hear the klunk. The ball didn’t hit the court. What 
happened? You immediately look up at the set. 

Likewise in conversation, the conversational ball goes back and 
forth. First you speak, then your partner speaks, you speak... and 
so it goes, back and forth. Each time, through a series of nods and 
comforting grunts like “um hum,” or “umm,” you let your con¬ 
versation partner know the ball has landed in your court. It’s your 
“I got it” signal. Such is the rhythm of conversation. 


7* 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Never Need to Wonder, “What Do I Say Next?” 79 


“What Do I Say Next?” 

Back to that frightfully familiar moment when it is your turn to 
speak but your mind goes blank. Don’t panic. Instead of signal¬ 
ing verbally or nonverbally that you “got it,” simply repeat—or 
parrot—the last two or three words your companion said, in a 
sympathetic, questioning tone. That throws the conversational ball 
right back in your partner’s court. 

My friend Phil sometimes picks me up at the airport. Usually 
I am so exhausted that I rudely fall asleep in the passenger seat, 
relegating Phil to nothing more than a chauffeur. 

After one especially exhausting trip some years ago, I flung 
my bags in his trunk and flopped onto the front seat. As I was 
dozing off, he mentioned he’d gone to the theater the night before. 
Usually I would have just grunted and wafted into unconscious¬ 
ness. However, on this particular trip, I had learned the Par¬ 
roting technique and was eager to try it. “Theater?” I parroted 
quizzically. 

“Yes, it was a great show,” he replied, fully expecting it to be 
the last word on the subject before I fell into my usual sleepy 
stupor. 

“Great show?” I parroted. Pleasantly surprised by my interest, 
he said, “Yes, it’s a new show by Stephen Sondheim called Sweeney 
Todd.” 

“Sweeney Todd ?” I again parroted. Now Phil was getting fired 
up. “Yeah, great music and an unbelievably bizarre story. . . .” 

“Bizarre story?” I parroted. Well, that’s all Phil needed. For 
the next half an hour, Phil told me the show’s story about a Lon¬ 
don barber who went around murdering people. I half dozed, but 
soon decided his tale of Sweeney Todd’s cutting off peoples’ heads 
was disturbing my sleepy reverie. So I simply backed up and par¬ 
roted one of his previous phrases to get him on another track. 

“You said it had great music?” 



80 How to Talk to Anyone 


That did the trick. For the rest of the forty-five-minute trip to 
my home, Phil sang me “Pretty Women,” “The Best Pies in Lon¬ 
don,” and other songs from Sweeney Todd —much better accom¬ 
paniment for my demi-nap. I’m sure, to this day, Phil thinks of 
that trip as one of the best conversations we ever had. And all I did 
was parrot a few of his phrases. 


-V 


ECHNIQUE 


#20 


Parroting 


Never be left speechless again. Like a parrot, simply 
repeat the last few words your conversation partner 
says. That puts the ball right back in his or her court, 
and then all you need to do is listen. 


Salespeople, why go on a wild goose chase for a customer’s real 
objections when it’s so easy to shake them out of the trees with 
Parroting? 


Parroting Your Way to Profits 

Parroting is also a can opener to pry open people’s real feelings. 
Star salespeople use it to get to their prospect’s emotional objec¬ 
tions, which they often don’t even articulate to themselves. A 
friend of mine, Paul, a used-car salesman, told me he credits a 
recent sale of a Lamborghini to Parroting. 

Paul was walking around the lot with a prospect and his wife, 
who had expressed interest in a “sensible car.” He was showing 
them every sensible Chevy and Ford on the lot. As they were look¬ 
ing at one very sensible family car, Paul asked the husband what 
he thought of it. “Well,” he mused, “I’m not sure this car is right 



How to Never Need to Wonder, “What Do I Say Next?” 81 


for me.” Instead of moving on to the next sensible car, Paul par¬ 
roted “Right for you?” Paul’s questioning inflection signaled the 
prospect that he needed to say more. 

“Well, er, yeah,” the prospect mumbled. “I’m not sure it fits 
my personality.” 

“Fits your personality?” Paul again parroted. 

“You know, maybe I need something a little more sporty.” 

“A little more sporty?” Paul parroted. 

“Well, those cars over there look a little more sporty.” 

Aha! Paul’s parrot had ferreted out which cars to show the cus¬ 
tomer. As they walked over toward a Lamborghini on the lot, Paul 
saw the prospect’s eyes light up. An hour later, Paul had pocketed 
a fat commission. 

Want to take a rest from talking to save your throat? This next 
technique gets your conversation partner off and running so all 
you have to do is listen (or even sneak off unnoticed as he or she 
chats congenially away). 



2 l How to Get’Em Happily 
(hatting (So You (an Slip 
Away if You Want To!) 


Every father smiles when his little tyke beseeches him at bedtime, 
“Daddy, Daddy, tell me the story again of the three little pigs” (or 
the dancing princesses or how you and Mommy met). Daddy 
knows Junior enjoyed the story so much the first time, he wants 
to hear it again and again. 

Junior inspires the following technique called “Encore!” which 
serves two purposes. Encore! makes a colleague feel like a hap¬ 
py dad, and it’s a great way to give dying conversation a heart 
transplant. 

I once worked on a ship that had Italian officers and mostly 
American passengers. Each week, the deck officers were required 
to attend the captain’s cocktail party. After the captain’s address 
in charmingly broken English, the officers invariably clumped 
together yakking it up in Italian. Needless to say, most of the pas¬ 
sengers’ grasp of Italian ended at macaroni, spaghetti, salami, and 
pizza. 

As cruise director, it fell on my shoulders to get the officers to 
mingle with the passengers. My not-so-subtle tactic was to grab 
one of the officers’ arms and literally drag him over to a smiling 
throng of expectant passengers. I would then introduce the offi¬ 
cer and pray that either the cat would release his tongue, or a pas- 


82 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Get ’Em Happily Chattmg (So You Can Slip Away if You Want To!) 83 


senger would come up with a more original question than “Gee, 
if all you officers are here, who is driving the boat?” Never hap¬ 
pened. I dreaded the weekly captain’s cocktail party. 

One night, sleeping in my cabin, I was awakened by the ship 
rocking violently from side to side. I listened and the engines were 
off. A bad sign. I grabbed my robe and raced up to the deck. 
Through the dense fog, I could barely discern another ship not 
half a mile from us. Five or six officers were grasping the starboard 
guardrail and leaning overboard. I rushed over just in time to see 
a man in the moonlight with a bandage over one eye struggling 
up our violently rocking ladder. The officers immediately whisked 
him off to our ship’s hospital. The engines started again and we 
were on our way. 

The next morning I got the full story. A laborer on the other 
ship, a freighter, had been drilling a hole in an engine cylinder. 
While he was working, a sharp, needle-thin piece of metal shot 
like a missile into his right eye. The freighter had no doctor on 
board so the ship broadcast an emergency signal. 

International sea laws dictate that any ship hearing a distress 
signal must respond. Our ship came to the rescue and the seaman, 
clutching his bleeding eye, was lowered into a lifeboat that brought 
him to our ship. Dr. Rossi, our ship’s doctor, was successfully able 
to remove the needle from the workman’s eye, thus saving his 
eyesight. 

“Tell ’Em About the Time You ...” 

Cut to the next captain’s cocktail party. Once again I was faced 
with the familiar challenge of getting officers to mingle and make 
small talk with the passengers. I made my weekly trek to the 
laconic officers’ throng to drag one or two away and, this time, my 
hand fell on the arm of the ship’s doctor. I hauled him over to the 
nearest group of grinning passengers and introduced him. I then 



84 How to Talk to Anyone 


said, “Just last week Dr. Rossi saved the eyesight of a seaman on 
another ship after a dramatic midnight rescue. Dr. Rossi, I’m sure 
these folks would love to hear about it.” 

It was like a magic wand. To my amazement, it was as though 
Dr. Rossi was blessed instantly with the tongues of angels. His pre¬ 
viously monosyllabic broken English became thickly accented elo¬ 
quence. He recounted the entire story for the growing group of 
passengers gathering around him. I left the throng that Dr. Rossi 
enraptured to pull another officer over to an awaiting audience. 

I grabbed the captain’s stripe-covered arm, dragged him over 
to another pack of smiling passengers and said, “Captain Cafiero, 
why don’t you tell these folks about the dramatic midnight rescue 
you made last week?” The cat released Cafiero’s tongue and he was 
off and running. 

Back to the throng to get the first officer for the next group. 
By now I knew I had a winner. “Signor Salvago, why don’t you tell 
these folks how you awakened the captain at midnight last week 
for the dramatic midnight rescue?” 

By then it was time to go back to extract the ship’s doctor from 
the first bevy and take him to his next pack of passengers. It worked 
even better the second time. He happily commenced his Encore! 
for the second audience. As he chatted away, I raced back to the 
captain to pull him away for a second telling with another throng. 
I felt like the circus juggler who keeps all the plates spinning on 
sticks. Just as I got one conversation spinning, I had to race back 
to the first speaker to give him a whirl at another audience. 

The captain’s cocktail parties were a breeze for me for the rest 
of the season. The three officers loved telling the same story of 
their heroism to new people every cruise. The only problem was 
I noticed the stories getting longer and more elaborate each time. 
I had to adjust my timing in getting them to do a repeat perfor¬ 
mance for the next audience. 



How to Get ’Em Happily Chatting (So Yon Can Slip Away if You Want To!) 8y 


Play It Again, Sam 

“Encore!” is what appreciative audiences chant when they want 
another song from the singer, another dance from the dancer, 
another poem from the poet, and in my case, another storytelling 
from the officers. Encore! is the technique you can use to request 
a repeat story from a prospect, potential employer, or valued 
acquaintance. While the two of you are chatting with a group of 
people, simply turn to him and say, “John, I bet everyone would 
love to hear about the time you caught that thirty-pound striped 
bass.” Or, “Susan, tell everyone that story you just told me of how 
you rescued the kitten from the tree.” He or she will, of course, 
demure. Insist! Your conversation partner is secretly loving it. The 
subtext of your request is “That story of yours was so terrific, I 
want my other friends to hear it.” After all, only crowd pleasers 
are asked to do an Encore! 


A. 


ECHNIQUE #21 

Encore! 


The sweetest sound a performer can hear welling up 
out of the applause is “Encore! Encore! Let’s hear it 
again!” The sweetest sound your conversation partner 
can hear from your lips when you’re talking with a 
group of people is “Tell them about the time you . . .” 

Whenever you’re at a meeting or party with 
someone important to you, think of some stories he or 
she told you. Choose an appropriate one from their 
repertoire that the crowd will enjoy. Then shine the 
spotlight by requesting a repeat performance. 



86 How to Talk to Anyone 


The added benefit of this technique is that, once you’ve got 
them up and running with their conversation, you can sneak off 
and find more interesting company! 

One word of warning: make sure the story you request is one 
in which the teller shines. No one wants to retell the time they lost 
the sale, cracked up the car, or broke up the bar and spent the 
night in jail. Make sure your requested Encore! is a positive story 
where they come out the big winner, not the buffoon. 

The full beauty of this technique will hit you like a happy 
thunderbolt the first time you use it with someone who is telling 
a long and wearisome tale. You simply tiptoe away and let the bore 
spin the story on and on with your friend. (Of course, your friend 
may never speak to you again. But that’s not germaine to this 
chapter!) 

The next technique deals with sharing some positive stories of 
your life. 



22 How to Come Across 
as a Positive Person 


Often people think when they meet someone they like, they 
should share a secret, reveal an intimacy, or make a confession of 
sorts to show they are human too. Airing your youthful battle with 
bed-wetting, teeth grinding, or thumb sucking—or your present 
struggle with gout or a goiter—supposedly endears you to the 
masses. 

Well, sometimes it does. One study showed that if someone 
is above you in stature, their revealing a foible brings them closer 
to you . 12 The holes in the bottom of presidential candidate Adlai 
Stevenson’s shoes charmed a nation, as did George H. W. Bush’s 
shocking admission that he couldn’t stomach broccoli. 

If you’re on sure footing, say a superstar who wants to become 
friends with a fan, go ahead and tell your devotees about the time 
you were out of work and penniless. But if you’re not a superstar, 
better play it safe and keep the skeletons in the closet until later. 
People don’t know you well enough to put your foible in context. 

Later in a relationship, telling your new friend you’ve been 
thrice married, you got caught shoplifting as a teenager, and you 
got turned down for a big job may be no big deal. And that may 
be the extent of what could be construed as black marks on an 
otherwise flawless life of solid relationships, no misdemeanors, and 


*7 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



88 How to Talk to Anyone 


an impressive professional record. But very early in a relationship, 
the instinctive reaction is “What else is coming? If he shares that 
with me so quickly, what else is he hiding? A closetful of ex¬ 
spouses, a criminal record, walls papered with rejection letters?” 
Your new acquaintance has no way of knowing your confession 
was a generous act, a well-intentioned revelation, on your part. 


-V 


ECHNIQUE #22 

Ac-cen-tu-ate the Pos i tive 


When first meeting someone, lock your closet door and 
save your skeletons for later. You and your new good 
friend can invite the skeletons out, have a good laugh, 
and dance over their bones later in the relationship. But 
now’s the time, as the old song says, to “ac-cen-tu-ate 
the pos-i-tive and elim-i-nate the neg-a-tive.” 


So far, in this section, you have found assertive methods for 
meeting people and mastering small talk. The next is both an 
assertive and defensive move to help spare you that pasty smile we 
tend to sport when we have no idea what people are talking about. 



^ How to Always Have 
Something Interesting 
to Say 


You’ve heard folks whine, “I can’t go to the party, I haven’t got a 
thing to wear.” When was the last time you heard, “I can’t go to 
the party, I haven’t got a thing to say?” 

When going to a gathering with great networking possibili¬ 
ties, you naturally plan your outfit and make sure your shoes will 
match. And, of course, you must have just the right tie or correct 
color lipstick. You puff your hair, pack your business cards, and 
you’re off. 

Whoa! Wait a minute. Didn’t you forget the most important 
thing? What about the right conversation to enhance your image? 
Are you actually going to say anything that comes to mind—or 
doesn’t—at the moment? You wouldn’t don the first outfit your 
groping hand hits in the darkened closet, so you shouldn’t leave 
your conversing to the first thought that comes to mind when fac¬ 
ing a group of expectant, smiling faces. You will, of course, fol¬ 
low your instincts in conversation. But at least be prepared in case 
inspiration doesn’t hit. 

The best way to ensure you’re conversationally in the swing of 
things is to listen to a newscast just before you leave. What’s hap¬ 
pening right now in the world—all the fires, floods, air disasters, 
toppled governments, and stock market crashes—pulverizes into 


89 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



go How to Talk to Anyone 


great conversational fodder, no matter what crowd you’re circu¬ 
lating in. 

It is with some embarrassment that I must attribute the fol¬ 
lowing technique to a businesswoman in the world’s oldest pro¬ 
fession. For a magazine article I was writing, I interviewed one of 
the savviest operators in her field, Sidney Biddle Barrows, the 
famed Mayflower Madam. 


2 $ 


ECHNIQUE 


#23 


The Latest News ... Don’t Leave Home 
Without It 


The last move to make before leaving for the party— 
even after you’ve given yourself final approval in the 
mirror—is to turn on the radio news or scan your 
newspaper. Anything that happened today is good 
material. Knowing the big-deal news of the moment is 
also a defensive move that rescues you from putting 
your foot in your mouth by asking what everybody’s 
talking about. Foot-in-mouth is not very tasty in 
public, especially when it’s surrounded by egg-on-face. 


Sidney told me she had a house rule when she was in business. 
All of her female “independent contractors” were directed to keep 
up with the daily news so they could be good conversationalists 
with their clients. This was not just Sidney’s whim. Feedback from 
her employees had revealed that 60 percent of her girls’ work hour 
was spent in chatting and only 40 percent in satisfying the cus¬ 
tomers’ needs. Thus she instructed them to read the daily news¬ 
paper or listen to a radio broadcast before leaving for an 



How to Always Have Something Interesting to Say pi 


appointment. Sidney told me when she initiated this rule, her busi¬ 
ness increased significantly. Reports came back from her clients 
complimenting her on the fascinating women she had working for 
her. The consummate businesswoman, Ms. Barrows always strove 
to exceed her customers’ expectations. 

Ready for the big leagues of conversation? Let’s go. 



This page intentionally left blank. 



PART THREE 

How to Talk 
Like a VIP 


Welcome to the human jungle. When two tigers prowling through 
the jungle chance upon one another in a clearing, they look at each 
other. They freeze. Instinctively they calculate, “If our staring 
came to hissing—came to scratching—came to clawing—who 
would win? Which of us has the stronger survival skills?” 

Tigers in the wilderness differ little from the urban upright 
animals inhabiting the corporate jungle (or singles jungle or social 
jungle). Humans start the process by looking at each other and 
talking. In the business world, while smiling and uttering “How 
do you do?” “Hello,” “Howdy,” or “Hi,” they are, like tigers, 
instinctively, instantaneously, sizing each other up. 

They’re not calculating the length of each other’s claws or the 
sharpness of their teeth. They’re judging each other on a weapon 
far more powerful to survival as they have defined it. Humans are 
judging each other’s communications skills. Although they may 
not know the names of the specific studies first proving it, they 
sense the truth: 85 percent of one’s success in life is directly due 
to communications skills. 13 

They may not be familiar with the U.S. Census Bureau’s 
recent survey showing employers choose candidates with good 
communications skills and attitude way over education, experi- 


93 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



94 How to Talk to Anyone 


ence, and training. 14 But they know communications skills get peo¬ 
ple to the top. Thus, by observing each other carefully during 
casual conversing, it becomes almost immediately evident to both 
which is the bigger cat in the human jungle. 

It doesn’t take long for people to recognize who is an “impor¬ 
tant” person. One cliche, one insensitive remark, one overanxious 
reaction, and you can be professionally or personally demoted. You 
can lose a potentially important friendship or business contact. 
One stupid move and you can tumble off the corporate or social 
ladder. 

The techniques in this section will help ensure that you make 
all the right moves so this doesn’t happen. The following com¬ 
munications skills give you a leg up to start your ascent to the top 
of any ladder you choose. 



m How to Find Out What 
They Do (Without 
Even Asking!) 


To size each other up, the first question little cats flat-pawedly ask 
each other is, “And what do you do? Hmm?” Then they crouch 
there, quivering their whiskers and twitching their noses, with an 
obvious “I’m going to pronounce silent judgment on you after you 
answer” look on their pusses. 

Big cats never ask outright, “What do you do?” (Oh they find 
out, all right, in a much more subtle manner.) By not asking the 
question, the big boys and big girls come across as more princi¬ 
pled, even spiritual. “After all,” their silence says, “a man or woman 
is far more than his or her job.” 

Resisting the tempting question also shows their sensitivity. 
With so much downsizing, rightsizing, and capsizing of corpora¬ 
tions these days, the blunt interrogation evokes uneasiness. The 
job question is not just unpleasant for those who are “between 
engagements.” I have several gainfully employed friends who hate 
being asked, “And what do you do?” (One of these folks cuts 
cadavers for autopsies, the other is an IRS collection agent.) 

Additionally, millions of talented and accomplished women 
have chosen to devote themselves to motherhood. When the cruel 
corporate question is thrust at them, they feel guilty. The rude 
interrogation belittles their commitment to their families. No mat- 


95 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



g 6 How to Talk to Anyone 


ter how the women answer, they fear the asker is only going to 
hear a humble “I’m just a housewife.” 

Big boys and big girls should avoid asking, “What do you do?” 
for another reason: their abstinence from the question leads lis¬ 
teners to believe that they are in the habit of soaring with a high¬ 
flying crowd. Recently I attended a posh party on Easy Street. (I 
suspect they invited me as their token working-class person.) I 
noticed no one was asking anyone what they did—because these 
swells didn’t do anything. Oh, some might have a ticker tape on 
the bed table of their mansion to track investments. But they def¬ 
initely did not work for a living. 

The final benefit to not asking, “What do you do?” is it throws 
people off guard. It convinces them you are enjoying their com¬ 
pany for who they are, not for any crass networking reason. 

Technique #24 

What Do You Do-NOT! 

A sure sign you’re a Somebody is the conspicuous ab¬ 
sence of the question, “What do you do?” (You deter¬ 
mine this, of course, but not with those four dirty 
words that label you as either a ruthless networker, a 
social climber, a gold-digging husband or wife hunter, 
or someone who’s never strolled along Easy Street.) 


The Right Way to Find Out 

So how do you find out what someone does for a living? (I thought 
you’d never ask.) You simply practice the following eight words. 
All together now: “How . . . do . . . you . . . spend . . . most . . . 
of. . . your . . . time?” 



How to Find Out What They Do (Without Even Asking!) 97 


“How do you spend most of your time?” is the gracious way 
to let a cadaver cutter, a tax collector, or a capsized employee off 
the hook. It’s the way to reinforce an accomplished mother’s 
choice. It’s the way to assure a spiritual soul you see his or her inner 
beauty. It’s a way to suggest to a swell that you reside on Easy 
Street, too. 

Now, suppose you’ve just made the acquaintance of someone 
who does like to talk about his or her work? Asking, “How do you 
spend most of your time?” also opens the door for workaholics to 
spout off, “Oh golly,” they mock moan, “I just spend all my time 
working.” That, of course, is your invitation to grill them for 
details. (Then they’ll talk your ear off.) Yet the new wording of 
your question gives those who are somewhere between “at leisure” 
and “work addicted” the choice of telling you about their job or 
not. Finally, asking “How do you spend most of your time?” 
instead of “And what do you do?” gives you your big cat stripes 
right off. 



*s How to Know What to 
Say When They Ask, 
“What Do You Do?” 


Now, 99 percent of the people you meet will, of course, ask “And 
what do you do?” Big winners, realizing someone will always ask, 
are fully prepared for the interrogation. 

Many folks have one written resume for job seeking. They 
type it up and then trudge off to the printer to get a nice neat 
stack to send to all prospective employers. The resume lists their 
previous positions, dates of employment, and education. Then, at 
the bottom, they might as well have scribbled, “Well, that’s me. 
Take it or leave it.” And usually they get left. Why? Because pro¬ 
spective employers do not find enough specific points in the 
resume that relate directly to what their firm is seeking. 

Boys and girls in the big leagues, however, have bits and bytes 
of their entire work experience tucked away in their computers. 
When applying for a job, they punch up only the appropriate data 
and print it out so it looks like it just came from the printer. 

My friend Roberto was out of work last year. He applied for 
two positions: a sales manager of an ice cream company and head 
of strategic planning for a fast-food chain. He did extensive 
research and found the ice cream company had deep sales diffi¬ 
culties and the food chain had long-range international aspirations. 


9 8 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Know What to Say When They Ask, “What Do You Do?” 99 


Did he send the same resume to each? Absolutely not. His resume 
never deviated one iota from the truth of his background. How¬ 
ever, for the ice cream company, he highlighted his experience 
turning a small company around by doubling its sales in three 
years. For the food chain, he underscored his experience working 
in Europe and his knowledge of foreign markets. 

Both firms offered Roberto the job. Now he could play them 
off against each other. He went to each, explaining he’d like to 
work for them but another firm was offering a higher salary or 
more perks. The two firms started bidding against each other for 
Roberto. He finally chose the food chain at almost double the 
salary they originally offered him. 

To make the most of every encounter, personalize your verbal 
resume with just as much care as you would your written cur¬ 
riculum vitae. Instead of having one answer to the omnipresent 
“What do you do?” prepare a dozen or so variations, depending 
on who’s asking. For optimum networking, every time someone 
asks about your job, give a calculated oral resume in a nutshell. 
Before you submit your answer, consider what possible interest the 
asker could have in you and your work. 

“Here’s How My Life Can Benefit Yours” 

Top salespeople talk extensively of the “benefit statement.” They 
know, when talking with a potential client, they should open their 
conversation with a benefit statement. When my colleague Brian 
makes cold calls, instead of saying “Hello, my name is Brian Tracy. 
I’m a sales trainer,” he says, “Hello, my name is Brian Tracy from 
the Institute for Executive Development. Would you be interested 
in a proven method that can increase your sales from 20 to 30 per¬ 
cent over the next twelve months?” That is his benefit statement. 
He highlights the specific benefits of what he has to offer to his 
prospect. 



ioo How to Talk to Anyone 


My hairdresser Gloria, I discovered, gives a terrific benefit 
statement to everyone she meets. That’s probably why she has so 
many clients. In fact, that’s how she got me as a client. When I 
met Gloria at a convention, she told me she was a hairdresser who 
specialized in flexible hairstyles for the businesswoman. She casu¬ 
ally mentioned she has many clients who choose a conservative 
hairstyle for work that they can instantly convert to a feminine 
style for social situations. “Hey, that’s me,” I said to myself, fin¬ 
gering my stringy little ponytail. I asked for her card and Gloria 
became my hairdresser. 

Then, several months later, I happened to see Gloria at 
another event. I overheard her chatting with a stylish grey-haired 
woman at the buffet table. Gloria was saying “... and we specialize 
in a wonderful array of blue rinses.” Now that was news to me! I 
didn’t remember seeing one grey head in her salon. 

As I was leaving the party, Gloria was out on the lawn talking 
animatedly with the host’s teenage daughters. “Oh yeah,” she was 
saying, “like we specialize in these really cool up-to-the-minute 
styles.” Good for you, Gloria! 

Like Gloria the hairdresser, give your response a once-over 
before answering the inevitable “What do you do?” When some¬ 
one asks, never give just a one-word answer. That’s for forms. If 
business networking is on your mind, ask yourself, “How could 
my professional experience benefit this person’s life?” For example, 
here are some descriptions various people might put on their tax 
return: 

Real estate agent 
Financial planner 
Martial arts instructor 
Cosmetic surgeon 
Hairdresser 



How to Know What to Say When They Ask, “What Do You Do?” ioi 


Any practitioner of the above professions should reflect on the 
benefit his or her job has to humankind. (Every job has some ben¬ 
efit or you wouldn’t get paid to do it.) The advice to the folks 
above is 

Don’t say “real estate agent.” Say “I help people moving into 
our area find the right home.” 

Don’t say “financial planner.” Say “I help people plan their 
financial future.” 

Don’t say “martial arts instructor.” Say “I help people defend 
themselves by teaching martial arts.” 

Don’t say “cosmetic surgeon.” Say “I reconstruct people’s faces 
after disfiguring accidents.” (Or, if you’re talking with a 
woman “of a certain age,” as the French so gracefully say, tell 
her, “I help people to look as young as they feel through cos¬ 
metic surgery.”) 

Don’t say “hairdresser.” Say “I help a woman find the right 
hairstyle for her particular face.” (Go, Gloria!) 

Putting the benefit statement in your verbal “Nutshell 
Resume” brings your job to life and makes it memorable. Even if 
your new acquaintance can’t use your services, the next time he or 
she meets someone moving into the area, wanting to plan their 
financial future, thinking of self defense, considering cosmetic sur¬ 
gery, or needing a new hairstyle, who comes to mind? Not the 
unimaginative people who gave the tax-return description of their 
jobs, but the big winners who painted a picture of helping people 
with needs. 


A Nutshell Resume for Your Private Life 

The Nutshell Resume works in nonbusiness situations, too. Since 
the new acquaintances will always ask you about yourself, prepare 



102 How to Talk to Anyone 


a few exciting stock answers. When meeting a potential friend or 
loved one, make your life sound like you will be a fun person to 
know. 

As a young girl, I wrote novels in my mind about my life. 
“Leil, squinting her eyes against the torrential downpour, bravely 
reached out the window into the icy storm to pull the shutters 
tight and keep the family safe from the approaching hurricane.” 
Big deal—Mama asked me to close the windows when it started 
to rain. Still, marching toward the open window, I fancied myself 
the family’s brave savior. 

You don’t need to be quite so melodramatic in your self-image, 
but at least punch up your life to sound interesting and dedicated. 


-V 


ECHNIQUE #25 

The Nutshell Resume 


Just as job-seeking top managers roll a different written 
resume off their printers for each position they’re 
applying for, let a different true story about your 
professional life roll off your tongue for each listener. 
Before responding to “What do you do?” ask yourself, 
“What possible interest could this person have in my 
answer? Could he refer business to me? Buy from me? 
Hire me? Marry my sister? Become my buddy?” 

Wherever you go, pack a nutshell about your own 
life to work into your communications bag of tricks. 



^ How to Sound Even 
Smarter Than You Are 


Did you ever hear someone try to say a word that was just too darn 
big for his tongue? By the smile on the speaker’s face and the gleam 
in his eye as the word limped off his lips, you knew he was really 
proud of it. (To make matters worse, he probably used the word 
incorrectly, inappropriately, and maybe even mispronounced it. 
Ouch.) 

The world perceives people with rich vocabularies to be more 
creative, more intelligent. People with larger vocabularies get hired 
quicker, promoted faster, and listened to a whole lot more. So big 
winners use rich, full words, but they never sound inappropriate. 
The phrases slide gracefully off their tongues to enrich their con¬ 
versation. The words fit. With the care that they choose their tie 
or their blouse, big players in life choose words to match their per¬ 
sonalities and their points. 

The startling good news is that the difference between a 
respected vocabulary and a mundane one is only about fifty words! 
You don’t need much to sound like a big winner. A mere few dozen 
wonderful words will give everyone the impression that you have 
an original and creative mind. 

Acquiring this super vocabulary is easy. You needn’t pore over 
vocabulary books or listen to tapes of pompous pontificators with 

I0 3 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



104 How to Talk to Anyone 


impossible British accents. You don’t need to learn two-dollar 
words that your grandmother, if she heard, would wash out of 
your mouth with soap. 

All you need to do is think of a few tired, overworked words 
you use every day—words like smart, nice, pretty, or good. Then 
grab a thesaurus or book of synonyms off the shelf. Look up that 
common word even you are bored hearing yourself utter every day. 
Examine your long list of alternatives. 

For example, if you turn to the word smart, you’ll find dozens 
of synonyms. Some words are colorful and rich like ingenious, 
resourceful, adroit, shrewd, and many more. Run down the list and 
say each out loud. Which ones fit your personality? Which ones 
seem right for you? Try each on like a suit of clothes to see which 
feel comfortable. Choose a few favorites and practice saying them 
aloud until they become a natural staple of your vocabulary. The 
next time you want to compliment someone on being smart, say, 
you’ll be purring 

“Oh, that was so clever of you.” 

“My how resourceful 
“That was ingenious." 

Or maybe, “How astute of you.” 


And Now, for Men Only 

Gentlemen, we women spend a lot of time in front of the mirror 
(as if you didn’t know). When I was in college, it used to take me 
a full fifteen minutes to fix myself up for a date. Every year since, 
I’ve had to add a few minutes. I’m now up to an hour and a half 
gussying myself up for an evening out. 

Gentlemen, when your wife comes down the staircase all 
dolled up for a night out, or you pick a lady up for dinner, what 
do you say? If you make no comment except, “Well, are you ready 
to go?” how do you think that makes the lady feel? 



How to Sound Even Smarter Than You Are 105 


My friend Gary is a nice gentleman and he occasionally takes 
me to dinner. I met him about twelve years ago, and I’ll never for¬ 
get the first time he arrived on my doorstep for our date. He said, 
“Leil, you look great.” I adored his reaction! 

I saw Gary a month or so later. On my doorstep again, “Leil, 
you look great.” The precise same words as the first time, but I 
still appreciated it. 

It’s been twelve long years now that this gentleman and I have 
been friends. I see him about once every two months, and every 
darn time it’s the same old comment, “Leil, you look great.” (I 
think I’ll show up one evening in a flannel nightshirt and a mud 
pack on my face. I swear Gary will say, “Leil, you look great.”) 

During my seminars, to help men avoid Gary’s mistake, I ask 
every male to think of a synonym for pretty or great. Then I bring 
up one woman and several men. I ask each to pretend he is her 
husband. She has just come down the stairs ready to go out to din¬ 
ner. I ask each to take her hand and deliver his compliment. 

“Darla,” one says, “you look elegant.” 

“Ooh!” Every woman in the room sighs. 

“Darla,” says another, taking her hand, “you look stunning.” 

“Ooh!” Every woman in the room swoons. 

“Darla,” says the third, putting her hand between his, “you 
look ravishing.” 

“Ooooh!” By now every woman in the room has gone limp. 

Pay attention men! Words work on us women. 


More Unisex Suggestions 

Suppose you’ve been at a party and it was wonderful. Don’t tell 
the hosts it was wonderful. Everybody says that. Tell them it was 
a splendid party, a superb party, an extraordinary party. Hug the 
hosts and tell them you had a magnificent time, a remarkable time, 
a glorious time. 



io 6 How to Talk to Anyone 


The first few times you say a word like glorious, it may not roll 
comfortably off your tongue. Yet you have no trouble with the 
word wonderful. Hmm, glor-i-ous doesn’t have any more syllables 
than won-der-ful. Neither does it have any more difficult sounds 
to pronounce. Vocabulary is all a matter of familiarity. Use your 
new favorite words a few times and, just like breaking in a new 
pair of shoes, you’ll be very comfortable wearing your glorious new 
words. 


Zb 


ECHNIQUE 


#2 6 


Your Personal Thesaurus 


Look up some common words you use every day in the 
thesaurus. Then, like slipping your feet into a new pair 
of shoes, slip your tongue into a few new words to see 
how they fit. If you like them, start making permanent 
replacements. 

Remember, only fifty words makes the difference 
between a rich, creative vocabulary and an average, 
middle-of-the-road one. Substitute a word a day for 
two months and you’ll be in the verbally elite. 



2 7 How to Not Sound 
Anxious (Let Them 
Discover Your Similarity) 


Tigers prowl with tigers; lions lurk with lions; and little alley cats 
scramble around with other little alley cats. Similarity breeds 
attraction. But in the human jungle, big cats know a secret. When 
you delay revealing your similarity, or let them discover it, it has 
much more punch. Above all, you don’t want to sound anxious to 
have rapport. 

Whenever someone mentions a common interest or experi¬ 
ence, instead of jumping in with a breathless, “Hey, me, too! I do 
that, too” or “I know all about that,” let your conversation part¬ 
ner enjoy talking about it. Let her go on about the country club 
before you tell her you’re a member, too. Let him go on analyzing 
the golf swing of Arnold Palmer before you start casually com¬ 
paring the swings of golf greats Greg, Jack, Tiger, and Arnie. Let 
her tell you how many tennis games she’s won before you just hap¬ 
pen to mention your USTA ranking. 

Several years ago, I was telling a new acquaintance how much 
I love to ski. He listened with interest as I indulged in a detailed 
travelogue of places I’d skied. I raved about the various resorts. I 
analyzed the various conditions. I discussed artificial versus natu¬ 
ral snow. It wasn’t until near the end of my monologue that I 


10 7 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



io 8 How to Talk to Anyone 


finally had the sense to ask my new acquaintance if he skied. He 
replied, “Yes, I keep a little apartment in Aspen.” 

Cool! If he’d jumped in and told me about his ski pad right 
after I first told him how much I liked skiing, I’d have been 
impressed. Mildly. However, waiting until the end of our conver¬ 
sation—and then revealing he was such an avid skier that he kept 
an Aspen ski pad—made it unforgettable. 

Here’s the technique I call “Kill the Quick ‘Me, Too!’ ” When¬ 
ever people mention an activity or interest you share, let them 
enjoy discussing their passion. Then, when the time is right, casu¬ 
ally mention you share their interest. 


Oh, I Must Have Been Boring You 

I waited weeks for the opportunity to try it out. Finally the 
moment presented itself at a convention. A new contact began 
telling me about her recent trip to Washington, D.C. (She had no 
idea that Washington was where I grew up.) She told me all about 
the Capitol, the Washington Monument, the Kennedy Center, and 
how she and her husband went bicycling in Rock Creek Park. 
(Momentarily I forgot I was keeping my mouth shut to practice 
my new technique. I was genuinely enjoying hearing about these 
familiar sights from a visitor’s perspective.) 

I asked her where she stayed, where she dined, and if she had 
a chance to get into any of the beautiful Maryland or Virginia sub¬ 
urbs. At one point, obviously pleased by my interest in her trip, 
she said, “You sound like you know a lot about Washington.” 

“Yes,” I replied. “It’s my hometown, but I haven’t been back 
there in ages.” 

“Your hometown!” she squealed. “My goodness, why didn’t 
you tell me? I must have been boring you.” 

“Oh, not at all,” I replied honestly. “I was enjoying hearing 
about your trip so much, I was afraid you’d stop if I told you.” Her 



How to Not Sound Anxious (Let Them Discover Your Similarity) iop 


big smile and barely audible “Oh gosh” let me know I had won a 
new friend. 

When someone starts telling you about an activity he has 
done, a trip she has made, a club he belongs to, an interest she 
has—anything that you share—bite your tongue. Let the teller 
relish his or her own monologue. Relax and enjoy it, too, secretly 
knowing how much pleasure your conversation partner will have 
when you reveal you share the same experience. Then, when the 
moment is ripe, casually disclose your similarity. And be sure to 
mention how much you enjoyed hearing about his or her shared 
interest. 




ECHNIQUE #27 

Kill the Quick “Me, Too!” 


Whenever you have something in common with 
someone, the longer you wait to reveal it, the more 
moved (and impressed) he or she will be. You emerge as 
a confident big cat, not a lonely little stray, hungry for 
quick connection with a stranger. 

P.S.: Don’t wait too long to reveal your shared 
interest or it will seem like you’re being tricky. 



28 How to Be a Jou- 
Firstie” to Gain Their 
Respect and Affection 


“SEX! Now that I have your attention. ...” Two-bit comics have 
been using that gag from the days when two bits bought a 
foursquare meal. However, big winners know there’s a three-letter 
word more potent then SEX to get people’s attention. That word 
is YOU. 

Why is you such a powerful word? Because when we were 
infants, we thought we were the center of the universe. Nothing 
mattered but ME, MYSELF, and I. The rest of the shadowy forms 
stirring about us (which we later learned were other people) existed 
solely for what they could do for us. Self-centered little tykes that 
we were, our tiny brains translated every action, every word, into, 
“How does that affect ME?” 

Big winners know we haven’t changed a bit. Adults camouflage 
their self-centeredness under a mask of civilization and politeness. 
Yet the human brain still immediately, instinctively, and unfailingly 
translates everything into terms of “How does that affect ME?” 

For example, suppose, gentlemen, you want to ask a colleague, 
Jill, if she would like to join you for dinner. So you say to her, 
“There’s a really good new Indian restaurant in town. Will you 
join me there for dinner tonight?” 


no 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Be a “You -Firstie” to Gain Their Respect and Affection 


hi 


Before answering, Jill is thinking to herself, “By ‘good’ does 
he mean the food or the atmosphere or both?” Her reverie con¬ 
tinues, “Indian cuisine, I’m not sure. He says it’s good. However, 
will I like it?” While thinking, Jill hesitates. You probably take her 
hesitation personally, and the joy of the exchange diminishes. 

Suppose, instead, you had said to her, “Jill, you will really love 
this new Indian restaurant. Will you join me there this evening 
for dinner?” Phrasing it that way, you’ve already subliminally 
answered Jill’s questions and she’s more apt to give you a quick 
“yes.” 

The pleasure-pain principle is a guiding force in life. Psy¬ 
chologists tell us everyone automatically gravitates toward that 
which is pleasurable and pulls away from that which is painful. 
For many people, thinking is painful. 

So big winners (when they wish to control, inspire, be loved by, 
sell to people, or get them to go to dinner) do the thinking for them. 
They translate everything into the other person’s terms by starting 
as many sentences as they can with that powerful little three-letter 
word, you. Thus, I call the technique “Comm-YOU-nication.” 


Comm-YOU-nicate When You 
Want a Favor 

Putting you first gets a much better response, especially when 
you’re asking a favor, because it pushes the asker’s pride button. 
Suppose you want to take a long weekend. You decide to ask your 
boss if you can take Friday off. Which request do you think he or 
she is going to react to more positively? “Can / take Friday off, 
Boss?” Or this one: “Boss, can you do without me Friday?” 

In the first case, Boss had to translate your “Can I take Friday 
off?” into “Can I do without this employee Friday?” That’s an extra 
thought process. (And you know how some bosses hate to think!) 



in How to Talk to Anyone 


However, in the second case, “Boss, can you do without me 
Friday,” you did Boss’s thinking for her. Your new wording made 
managing without you a matter of pride for Boss. “Of course,” she 
said to herself. “I can manage without your help Friday.” 


Comm-YOU-nicate Your Compliments 

Comm-YOU-nication also enriches your social conversation. Gen¬ 
tlemen, say a lady likes your suit. Which woman gives you warmer 
feelings? The woman who says, “I like your suit.” Or the one who 
says, “You look great in that suit.” 

Big players who make business presentations use Comm- 
YOU-nication to excellent advantage. Suppose you’re giving a talk 
and a participant asks a question. He likes to hear you say, “That’s 
a good question.” However, consider how much better he feels 
when you tell him, “ You’ve asked a good question.” 

Salespeople, don’t just tell your prospects, “It’s important that 
. . . . ” Convince them by informing them, “ You’ll see the impor¬ 
tance of. . . . ” 

When negotiating, instead of, “The result will be ... ” let 
them know, “You’ll see the result when you. . . .” 

Starting sentences with you even works when talking to 
strangers on the street. Once, driving around San Francisco hope¬ 
lessly lost, I asked people walking along the sidewalk how to get 
to the Golden Gate Bridge. I stopped a couple trudging up a hill. 
“Excuse me,” I called out the window, “I can’t find the Golden 
Gate Bridge.” The pair looked at each other and shrugged with 
that “How stupid can these tourists get” look on their faces. “That 
direction,” the husband mumbled, pointing straight ahead. 

Still lost, I called out to the next couple I encountered. 
“Excuse me, where’s the Golden Gate Bridge?” Without smiling, 
they pointed in the opposite direction. 



How to Be a “You -Firstie” to Gain Their Respect and Affection 113 


Then I decided to try Comm-YOU-nication. When I came 
upon the next strolling couple, I called out the window, “Excuse 
me, could you tell me where the Golden Gate Bridge is?” 

“Of course,” they said, answering my question literally. You 
see, by phrasing the question that way, it was a subtle challenge. I 
was asking, in essence, “Are you able to give me directions?” This 
hits them in the pride button. They walked over to my car and 
gave me explicit instructions. 

“Hey,” I thought. “This you stuff really works.” To test my 
hypothesis, I tried it a few more times. I kept asking passersby my 
three forms of the question. Sure enough, whenever I asked, 
“Could you tell me where .. .” people were more pleasant and help¬ 
ful than when I started the question with / or where. 




ECHNIQUE #28 

Comm-YOU-nication 


Start every appropriate sentence with you. It immedi¬ 
ately grabs your listener’s attention. It gets a more 
positive response because it pushes the pride button 
and saves them having to translate it into “me” terms. 

When you sprinkle you as liberally as salt and 
pepper throughout your conversation, your listeners 
find it an irresistible spice. 


I’m sure when they recover the flight box from the Fall of Man 
under a fig leaf in the Garden of Eden, it will convince the world 
of the power of the word you. Eve did not ask Adam to eat the 
apple. She did not command him to eat the apple. She didn’t even 



ii4 How to Talk to Anyone 


say, “Adam, I want you to eat this apple.” She phrased it (as all big 
winners would), “You will love this apple.” That’s why he bit. 


Comm-YOU-nication Is a Sign of Sanity 

Therapists calculate inmates of mental institutions say / and me 
twelve times more often than residents of the outside world. As 
patients’ conditions improve, the number of times they use the 
personal pronouns also diminishes. 

Continuing up the sanity scale, the fewer times you use /, the 
more sane you seem to your listeners. If you eavesdrop on big win¬ 
ners talking with each other, you’ll notice a lot mor e you than / in 
their conversation. 

The next technique concerns a way big winners are silently 
yo«-oriented. 



29 How to Make Them Feel 
You “Don’t Smile at 
Just Anybody” 


Have you ever seen those low-budget, mail-order fashion cata¬ 
logues that use the same model throughout? Whether she is 
engulfed in a wedding gown or partially clad in a bikini, her face 
sports the same plastic smile. Looking at her, you get the feeling 
if you rapped on her forehead, a tiny voice would come back say¬ 
ing “Nobody’s in here.” 

Whereas models in more sophisticated magazines have mas¬ 
tered a myriad of different expressions: a flirtatious “I’ve got a 
secret” smile on one page; a quizzical “I think I’d like to get to 
know you but I’m not sure” smile on the next; and a mysterious 
Mona Lisa smile on the third. You feel there’s a brain running the 
operation somewhere inside that beautiful head. 

I once stood in the receiving line of the ship I worked on, 
along with the captain, his wife, and several other officers. One 
passenger with a radiant smile started shaking hands down our 
line. When he got to me, he flashed a shimmering smile, reveal¬ 
ing teeth as even and white as keys on a new piano. I was trans¬ 
fixed. It was as though a brilliant light had illuminated the dim 
ballroom. I wished him a happy cruise and resolved to find this 
charming gentleman later. 


ns 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



ii6 How to Talk to Anyone 


Then he was introduced to the next person. Out of the cor¬ 
ner of my eye, I saw his identical glistening grin. A third person, 
the same grin. My interest began to dwindle. 

When he gave his fourth indistinguishable smile to the next 
person, he started to resemble a Cheshire cat. By the time he was 
introduced to the fifth person, his consistent smile felt like a strobe 
light disturbing the ambience of the ballroom. Strobe Man went 
on flashing everybody the same smile down the line. I had no fur¬ 
ther interest in talking with him. 

Why did this man’s stock shoot high in my ticker one minute 
and plummet the next? Because his smile, although charming, 
reflected no special reaction to me. Obviously, he gave the same 
smile to everybody and, by that, it lost all its specialness. If Strobe 
Man had given each of us a slightly different smile, he would have 
appeared sensitive and insightful. (Of course, if his smile had been 
just a tad bigger for me than for the others, I couldn’t have waited 
for the formalities to be over to seek him out in the crowded 
ballroom.) 


Review Your Repertoire of Smiles 

If your job required you to carry a gun, you would, of course, learn 
all about the moving parts before firing it. And before taking aim, 
you would carefully consider whether it would murder, maim, or 
merely wound your target. Since your smile is one of your biggest 
communications weapons, learn all about the moving parts and the 
effect on your target. Set aside five minutes. Lock your bedroom or 
bathroom door so your family doesn’t think you’ve gone off the 
deep end. Now stand in front of the mirror and flash a few smiles. 
Discover the subtle differences in your repertoire. 

Just as you would alternate saying “Hello,” “How do you do,” 
and “I am pleased to meet you” when being introduced to a group 



How to Make Them Feel You “Don’t Smile at Just Anybody” 117 


of people, vary your smile. Don’t use the same on each. Let each 
of your smiles reflect the nuances of your sentiment about the 
recipient. 


Zh 


ECHNIQUE #29 

The Exclusive Smile 


If you flash everybody the same smile, like a Confed¬ 
erate dollar, it loses value. When meeting groups of 
people, grace each with a distinct smile. Let your smiles 
grow out of the beauty big players find in each new 
face. 

If one person in a group is more important to you 
than the others, reserve an especially big, flooding smile 
just for him or her. 


In Defense of the Quickie 

There are times, I discovered, when the quick put-on smile works. 
For example, when you want to engineer the acquaintance of 
someone to whom you have not had the opportunity to be intro¬ 
duced. (In the vernacular, that’s “pick them up.”) 

The smile’s pickup power was proven for posterity by solemn 
researchers at the University of Missouri. They conducted a highly 
controlled study titled “Giving Men the Come-On: Effect of Eye 
Contact and Smiling in a Bar Environment .” 15 (I kid you not.) To 
prove their hypothesis, female researchers made eye contact with 
unsuspecting male subjects enjoying a little libation in a local 
drinking establishment. Sometimes, the female researchers fol¬ 
lowed their glance with a smile. In other cases, no smile. 



ii8 How to Talk to Anyone 


The results? I quote the study: “The highest approach behav¬ 
ior, 60 percent, was observed in the condition in which there was 
smiling.” That translates into layman’s English: “The guy came 
over 60 percent of the time when the lady smiled.” Without the 
smile, he “made the approach only 20 percent of the time.” So, 
yes, a smile works for those who wish to pick somebody up. 

However, in situations where the stakes are higher, try The 
Flooding Smile from the first section and now The Exclusive 
Smile. 




How to Avoid Sounding 
Like a Jerk 


Do you remember that scene from the movie classic Annie Hall 
where Diane Keaton is first meeting Woody Allen? As she’s chat¬ 
ting with him, we hear her private thoughts. She’s musing to her¬ 
self, “Oh I hope he’s not a jerk like all the others.” 

One of the quickest ways to make a big winner think you are, 
well, a jerk, is to use a cliche. If you’re chatting with a top com¬ 
municator and even innocently remark “Yes, I was tired as a dog,” 
or “She was cute as a button,” you’ve unknowingly laid a linguis¬ 
tic bomb. 

Big winners silently moan when they hear someone mouth a 
trite overworn phrase. Oh sure, just like the rest of us, big win¬ 
ners find themselves feeling fit as a fiddle, happy as a lark, or high 
as a kite. Like the rest of humanity, they consider some of their 
acquaintances crazy as a loon, nutty as a fruitcake, or blind as a 
bat. Because many of them work hard, many of them are as busy 
as a bee and get rich as Croesus. 

Yet would any of them describe themselves in those words? 
Not in a coon’s age! Why? Because when a big winner hears your 
cliche, you might as well be saying, “My powers of imagination 
are impoverished. I can’t think of anything original to say, so I 
must fall back on these trite overworn phrases.” Mouthing a com- 

119 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



no How to Talk to Anyone 


mon cliche around uncommonly successful people brands you as 
uncommonly common. 


4 * 


ECHNIQUE #30 

Don’t Touch a Cliche with a Ten-Foot Pole 


Be on guard. Don’t use any cliches when chatting with 
big winners. Don’t even touch one with a ten-foot pole. 
Never? Not even when hell freezes over? Not unless you 
want to sound dumb as a doorknob. 

Instead of coughing up a cliche, roll your own 
clever phrases by using the next technique. 



3^ How to Use 
Motivational Speakers’ 
Techniques to Enhance 
Your Conversation 


They say the pen is mightier than the sword. It is, but the tongue 
is even mightier than the pen. Our tongues can bring crowds to 
laughter, to tears, and often to their feet in shouting appreciation. 
Orators have moved nations to war or brought lost souls to God. 
And what is their equipment? The same eyes, ears, hands, legs, 
arms, and vocal chords you and I have. 

Perhaps a professional athlete has a stronger body or a profes¬ 
sional singer is blessed with a more beautiful singing voice than 
the one we were doled out. But the professional speaker starts out 
with the same equipment we all have. The difference is, these jaw- 
smiths use it all. They use their hands, they use their bodies, and 
they use specific gestures with heavy impact. They think about the 
space they’re talking in. They employ many different tones of 
voice, they invoke various expressions, they vary the speed with 
which they speak . . . and they make effective use of silence. 

You may not have to make a formal speech anytime soon, but 
chances are sometime (probably very soon) you’re going to want 


121 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



122 How to Talk to Anyone 


people to see things your way. Whether it’s persuading your fam¬ 
ily to spend their next vacation at Grandmas, or convincing the 
stockholders in your multimillion-dollar corporation that it’s time 
to do a takeover, do it like a pro. Get a book or two on public 
speaking and learn some of the tricks of the trade. Then put some 
of that drama into your everyday conversation. 


A Gem for Every Occasion 

If stirring words help make your point, ponder the impact of pow¬ 
erful phrases. They’ve helped politicians get elected (“Read my 
lips: no new taxes.”) and defendants get acquitted (“If it doesn’t 
fit, you must acquit.”). 

If George H. W. Bush had said, “I promise not to raise taxes,” 
or Johnny Cochran, during O. J. Simpson’s criminal trial, had said, 
“If the glove doesn’t fit, he must be innocent,” their bulky sen¬ 
tences would have slipped in and out of the voter’s or juror’s con¬ 
sciousness. As every politician and trial lawyer knows, neat phrases 
make powerful weapons. (If you’re not careful, your enemies will 
later use them against you—read my lips!) 

One of my favorite speakers is a radio broadcaster named 
Barry Farber who brightens up late-night radio with sparkling sim¬ 
iles. Barry would never use a cliche like “nervous as a cat on a hot 
tin roof.” He’d describe being nervous about losing his job as “I 
felt like an elephant dangling over a cliff with his tail tied to a 
daisy.” Instead of saying he looked at a pretty woman, he’d say, 
“My eyeballs popped out and dangled by the optic nerve.” 

When I first met him, I asked, “Mr. Farber, how do you come 
up with these phrases?” 

“My daddy’s Mr. Farber. I’m Barry,” he chided (his way of say¬ 
ing, “Call me Barry”). He then candidly admitted, although some 
of his phrases are original, many are borrowed. (Elvis Presley used 



Hoiv to Use Motivational Speakers’ Techniques to Enhance Your Conversation 123 


to say, “My daddy’s Mr. Presley. Call me Elvis.”) Like all profes¬ 
sional speakers, Barry spends several hours a week gleaning 
through books of quotations and humor. All professional speakers 
do. They collect bon mots they can use in a variety of situations— 
most especially to scrape egg off their faces when something unex¬ 
pected happens. 

Many speakers use authors and speaker’s agent Lilly Walters’s 
face-saver lines from her book, What to Say When You’re Dying on 
the Platform. 16 If you tell a joke and no one laughs, try “That joke 
was designed to get a silent laugh—and it worked.” If the micro¬ 
phone lets out an agonizing howl, look at it and say, “I don’t under¬ 
stand. I brushed my teeth this morning.” If someone asks you a 
question you don’t want to answer, “Could you save that question 
until I’m finished—and well on my way home?” All pros think of 
holes they might fall into and then memorize great escape lines. 
You can do the same. 

Look through books of similes to enrich your day-to-day con¬ 
versations. Instead of “happy as a lark” try “happy as a lottery win¬ 
ner” or “happy as a baby with its first ice cream cone.” Instead of 
“bald as an eagle,” try “bald as a new marine” or “bald as a bull¬ 
frog’s belly.” Instead of “quiet as a mouse,” try “quiet as an eel 
swimming in oil” or “quiet as a fly lighting on a feather duster.” 

find phrases that have visual impact. Instead of a cliche like 
“sure as death and taxes,” try “as certain as beach traffic in July” 
or “as sure as your shadow will follow you.” Your listeners can’t see 
death or taxes. But they sure can see beach traffic in July or their 
shadow following them down the street. 

Try to make your similes relate to the situation. If you’re rid¬ 
ing in a taxi with someone, “as sure as that taxi meter will rise” has 
immediate impact. If you’re talking with a man walking his dog, 
“as sure as your dog is thinking about that tree” adds a touch of 
humor. 



124 How to Talk to Anyone 


Make ’Em Laugh, Make ’Em Laugh, 

Make ’Em Laugh 

Humor enriches any conversation. But not jokes starting with, 
“Hey didja hear the one about. . . ?” Plan your humor and make 
it relevant. For example, if you’re going to a meeting on the bud¬ 
get, look up money in a quotation book. In an uptight business 
situation, a little levity shows you’re at ease. 

Once, during an oppressive financial meeting, I heard a top 
executive say, “Don’t worry, this company has enough money to 
stay in business for years—unless we pay our creditors.” He broke 
the tension and won the appreciation of all. Later I saw a similar 
quote in a humor book attributed to Jackie Mason, the comedian. 
So what? The exec still came across as a cool communicator with 
his clever comment. 

Big players who want to be quoted in the media lie awake at 
night gnawing the pillow trying to come up with phrases the press 
will pick up. A Michigan veterinarian named Timothy, a heavy 
hitter in his own field but completely unknown outside it, made 
national headlines when he planned to attach a pair of feet to a 
rooster who lost his to frostbite. Why? Because he called it a 
“drumstick transplant.” 

I don’t know if a French woman, Jeanne Calment, then offi¬ 
cially the world’s oldest person, was looking for publicity on her 
122nd birthday. But she made international headlines when she told 
the media, “I’ve only ever had one wrinkle, and I’m sitting on it.” 

Mark Victor Hansen, a big player in his own field but once rel¬ 
atively unknown outside of it, was propelled into national promi¬ 
nence when he came up with a catchy name for his book 
coauthored with Jack Canfield, Chicken Soup for the Soul. He told 
me his original title was 101 Pretty Stories. How far would that have 
gone? Soon the world was lapping up, among others, his Chicken 



Hoiv to Use Motivational Speakers’ Techniques to Enhance Your Conversation 125 


Soup for the Womans Soul, Chicken Soup for the Teenage Soul, 
Chicken Soup for the Mother’s Soul, Chicken Soup for the Christian 
Soul, plus second, third, and fourth servings of chicken soup in 
hardcover, paperback, audiocassette, videocassette, and calendars. 


A Word of Warning 

No matter how good your material is, it bombs if it doesn’t fit the 
situation. I learned this the hard way during my cruise ship days. 
On a cruise to England I decided to give my passengers a reading 
of the English love poems of Elizabeth Barrett and Robert Brown¬ 
ing. You know, “How do I love thee? Let me count the ways.” It 
was a BIG hit. The passengers loved it and raved for days. I 
couldn’t walk out on deck without some passenger turning to me 
and affectionately echoing, “How do I love thee?” 


-V, 


ECHNIQUE #31 

Use Jawsmith’s Jive 


Whether you’re standing behind a podium facing 
thousands or behind the barbecue grill facing your 
family, you’ll move, amuse, and motivate with the 
same skills. 

Read speakers’ books to cull quotations, pull pearls 
of wisdom, and get gems to tickle their funny bones. 
Find a few bon mots to let casually slide off your 
tongue on chosen occasions. If you want to be notable, 
dream up a crazy quotable. 

Make ’em rhyme, make ’em clever, or make ’em 
funny. Above all, make ’em relevant. 



n6 How to Talk to Anyone 


Naturally I got a pretty swollen head over this performance 
and fancied myself an eminent poetry reader. I decided to reward 
the passengers on the next cruise (which was a cruise to the 
Caribbean and didn’t go anywhere in the neighborhood of 
England) with my spectacular reading of the English love poems. 
WHAT A BOMB! Passengers avoided me on the deck for the rest 
of the cruise. “How did you bore me? Let me count the ways.” 



&amp; How to Banter Like the 
Big Shots Do (Big 
Winners Tell It Like It Is) 


If you stepped into an elevator full of people speaking Hungar¬ 
ian, you might not recognize they were Hungarian unless you 
spoke their language. However, the minute you opened your 
mouth, they’d recognize you’re not Hungarian. 

It’s the same with the big cats. If you overhear several of them 
speaking, you might not recognize they’re big cats. However, the 
minute you opened your mouth they’d recognize you’re not a big 
cat, unless you spoke their lingo. 

What are some differences between a big cat’s growl and a lit¬ 
tle cat’s insignificant hiss? One of the most blatant is euphemisms. 
Big cats aren’t afraid of real words. They call a spade a spade. 
Words like toilet paper don’t scare them. Little cats hide behind 
bathroom tissue. If somebody is rich, big cats call it “rich.” Little 
cats, oh so embarrassed at the concept of talking about money in 
polite company, substitute the word wealthy. When little cats use 
a substitute word or euphemism, they might as well be saying, 
“Whoops, you are better than I am. I’m in polite company now 
and so I’ll use the nicey-nice word.” 

Big cats are anatomically correct—no cutesy words for body 
parts. They’ll say “breasts” when they mean breasts. When they 


I2J 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



128 How to Talk to Anyone 


say “knockers,” they mean decorative structures that hang on the 
front door. And “family jewels” are in the safe on the wall. 

If a big cat is ever in doubt about a word, he or she simply 
resorts to French. If they feel the word buttocks is debatable, der- 
riere will do quite nicely, thank you. 


4 * 


ECHNIQUE #32 

Call a Spade a Spade 


Don’t hide behind euphemisms. Call a spade a spade. 
That doesn’t mean big cats use tasteless four-letter 
words when perfectly decent five- and six-letter ones 
exist. They’ve simply learned the King’s English, and 
they speak it. 

Here’s another way to tell the big players from the 
little ones just by listening to a few minutes of their 
conversation. 



55 How to Avoid the 
World’s Worst 
Conversational Habit 

Once I was at a small dinner party given by the president of an 
advertising agency, Louis, and his wife, Lillian. The evening 
started with cocktails, followed by a gourmet meal accompanied 
by a selection of excellent wines. The conversation had been con¬ 
vivial, the cuisine delicious, and the wine very fine. And very plen¬ 
tiful. At the end of the evening, Louis raised his glass to make a 
toast. A few wine droplets sloshed out of his glass onto the 
tablecloth. 

A pretty young woman who was the date of a new art direc¬ 
tor named Bob giggled and said, “I can tell you’re feeling no pain.” 

Shock waves went around the table. Everyone froze. The host 
was indeed a bit inebriated. However, alluding to Louis being a 
little looped, even in jest, was as though the woman had suddenly 
smashed the crystal chandelier above the table with her dinner 
plate. 

One guest quickly covered the girl’s horrifying gaffe by lift¬ 
ing her glass and saying “None of us is. No one in the company 
of Louis and Lillian could ever feel any pain. Here’s to a truly won¬ 
derful evening.” 

Louis then continued with his toast to the wonderful com¬ 
pany, and no one was feeling pain any longer. Except Bob. He 


I2p 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



ijo How to Talk to Anyone 


knew his date’s innocent teasing was a black mark, if not in his 
personnel file, on his personal file. 

The next sure sign of a little cathood is teasing. Little cats go 
around patting their friends’ paunches and saying, “Enjoying that 
cheesecake, huh?” Or looking at their balding heads and saying, 
“Hey, hair today, gone tomorrow, huh?” They think it’s hilarious 
to make a quip at someone else’s expense and say “You don’t have 
an inferiority complex. You are inferior! Hardy har har.” 


Zb 


ECHNIQUE #33 

Trash the Teasing 


A dead giveaway of a little cat is his or her proclivity to 
tease. An innocent joke at someone else’s expense may 
get you a cheap laugh. Nevertheless, the big cats will 
have the last one. Because you’ll bang your head against 
the glass ceiling they construct to keep little cats from 
stepping on their paws. 

Never, ever, make a joke at anyone else’s expense. 
You’ll wind up paying for it, dearly. 



34 How to Give Them the 
Bad News (and Have 
Them Like You AH 
the More) 


In ancient Egypt, the pharaoh treated the humblest message run¬ 
ner like a prince when he arrived at the palace, if he brought good 
news. However, if the exhausted runner had the misfortune to 
bring the pharaoh unhappy news, his head was chopped off. 

Shades of that spirit pervade today’s conversations. Once a 
friend and I packed up some peanut butter and jelly sandwiches 
for an outing. As we waltzed happily out the door, picnic basket 
in hand, a smiling neighbor, rocking away on his porch, looked 
up at the sky and said, “Oh boy, bad day for a picnic. The news¬ 
cast says it’s going to rain.” I wanted to rub his face in my peanut 
butter and jelly sandwich. Not for his gloomy weather report, for 
his smile. 

Several months ago I was racing to catch a bus. As I breath¬ 
lessly shoved my handful of cash across the Greyhound counter, 
the grinning sales agent gushed, “Oh that bus left five minutes 
ago.” Dreams of decapitation! 

It’s not the news that makes someone angry. It’s the unsym¬ 
pathetic attitude with which it’s delivered. Everyone must give bad 


131 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



i^2 How to Talk to Anyone 


news from time to time, and winning professionals do it with the 
proper attitude. A doctor advising a patient she needs an opera¬ 
tion does it with compassion. A boss informing an employee he 
didn’t get the job takes on a sympathetic demeanor. Grief coun¬ 
selors at airports after fatal crashes share the grief-stricken senti¬ 
ment of relatives. Big winners know, when delivering any bad 
news, they should share the sentiment of the receiver. 

Unfortunately, many people are not aware of this sensitivity. 
When you’re weary from a long flight, has a hotel clerk cheerfully 
chirped that your room isn’t ready yet? When you had your heart 
set on the roast beef, has your waiter merrily warbled that he just 
served the last piece? When you needed cash for the weekend, has 
your bank teller gleefully told you your account is overdrawn? It 
makes you as traveler, diner, or depositor want to put your fist 
right through their insensitive grins. 




ECHNIQUE #34 

It’s the Receiver’s Ball 


A football player wouldn’t last two beats of the time 
clock if he made blind passes. A pro throws the ball 
with the receiver always in mind. 

Before throwing out any news, keep your receiver in 
mind. Then deliver it with a smile, a sigh, or a sob. Not 
according to how you feel about the news, but how the 
receiver will take it. 


Had my neighbor told me of the impending rainstorm with 
sympathy, I would have appreciated his warning. Had the Grey¬ 
hound salesclerk sympathetically informed me that my bus had 
already left, I probably would have said, “Oh, that’s all right. 



How to Give Them the Bad News (and Have Them Like You All the More) 133 


I’ll catch the next one.” Big winners, when they bear bad news, 
deliver bombs with the emotion the bombarded person is sure to 
have. 

Big winners know how to give bad news to people. They also 
know how not to give any news to anyone, even when people are 
pressuring them. Let’s explore that next. 



35 How to Respond When 
You Don’t Want to 
Answer (and Wish They’d 
Shut the Heck Up) 


One of my clients Barbara, a ministar in the furniture business, 
recently separated from her husband and business partner, Frank, 
a megastar in the furniture business. They suffered a long and 
messy divorce that resulted in them keeping the business jointly 
but not having to deal with each other. 

Soon after the divorce, I was at an industry convention with 
Barbara. Since she and Frank were both beloved in the industry, 
people were curious about what had happened and how it affected 
their company. But, of course, no one dared ask outright. And Bar¬ 
bara was offering no explanations. 

I was seated next to Barbara at the gala farewell dinner. Appar¬ 
ently one of her colleagues at the table couldn’t contain her curios¬ 
ity any longer. During dessert, she leaned over to Barbara and in 
a hushed voice asked, “Barbara, what happened with you and 
Frank?” 

Barbara, unruffled by the rude question, simply took a spoon¬ 
ful of her cherries jubilee and said, “We’ve separated, but the com¬ 
pany is unaffected.” 


134 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



Hoiv to Respond When You Don’t Want to Answer 135 


Not satisfied with that answer, the woman pumped harder. 
“Are you still working together?” 

Barbara took another bite of her dessert and repeated in pre¬ 
cisely the same tone of voice, “We’ve separated, but the company 
is unaffected.” 

The frustrated interrogator was not going to give up easily. 
“Are you both still working in the company?” 

Barbara, appearing not the least disturbed by the woman’s 
incontinent insistence, scooped the last cherry out of her dish, 
smiled, looked directly at her, and said in the identical tone of 
voice, “We’ve separated, but the company is unaffected.” 

That shut her up. Barbara had shown her big winner’s badge 
by using “The Broken Record” technique, the most effective way 
to curtail an unwelcome cross-examination. 


4 * 


ECHNIQUE #35 

The Broken Record 


Whenever someone persists in questioning you on an 
unwelcome subject, simply repeat your original 
response. Use precisely the same words in precisely the 
same tone of voice. Hearing it again usually quiets 
them down. If your rude interrogator hangs on like a 
leech, your next repetition never fails to flick them off. 



5^ How to Talk to a 
Celebrity 


Suppose you’ve just settled in for dinner at a nice restaurant. You 
look over at the next table, and who do you see? Is it really he? 
Could it possibly be? It’s gotta be a look-alike. No, it isn’t! It really 
is . . . Woody Allen. (Substitute any celebrity here: your favorite 
movie star, politician, broadcaster, boss who owns the company 
that owns the company you work for.) And there the celestial body 
is in the flesh, sitting not ten feet from you. What should you do? 

Nothing! Big shots don’t slobber over stars. Let the luminary 
enjoy a brief moment of anonymity. If he or she should cast a 
glance in your direction, give a smile and a nod. Then waft your 
gaze back to your dining companion. You will be a lot cooler in 
the eyes of your dinner partner if you take it all in your stride. 

Now, if you just can’t resist this once-in-a-lifetime opportu¬ 
nity to press the flesh of the megastar and tell him or her of your 
admiration, here’s how to do it with grace. Wait until you or the 
luminary are leaving the restaurant. After the check has been paid 
and you will obviously not be taking much of his or her time, you 
may make your approach. Say something like, “Mr. Allen, I just 
want to tell you how much pleasure your wonderful films have 
given me over the years. Thank you so much.” 


136 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Talk to a Celebrity zyy 


Did you pick up the subtlety here? You are not compliment¬ 
ing his work. “After all,” he might well ask himself, “who are you 
to judge whether I am a great filmmaker or not?” You can only 
speak from your own perspective. You do this by telling him how 
much pleasure his work has given you. 

If it’s your boss’s boss’s boss’s boss whom the fates have sent 
to bask in your adulation, do the same. Do not say “Bill” or “Mr. 
Gates, you really run a great company.” 

“Lowly geek,” he thinks, “who are you to judge?” Instead, tell 
him what an honor it is to work for him. Obviously this is not the 
moment to detail the intricacies of your improvements on image¬ 
editing software for digitizing photographs. 

Then let your body language express that if Woody or Bill or 
the other megastar wants to leave it at that, you are happy with 
the exchange. If, however, the megastar is captivated by you (or 
has had so much liquid merriment that he or she has decided to 
mingle with the masses tonight), then all bets are off. You’re on 
your own. Enjoy! Until you pick up the first body-language sign 
that they would like to end it. Think of yourself as a ballroom 
dance student waltzing with your teacher. He leads, you follow. 
And he tells you when the waltz is over. 

Incidentally, if the megastar is with a companion and your 
conversation goes on for more than a few moments, direct some 
comments at the companion. If the satellite is in such stellar com¬ 
pany, he or she is probably also an accomplished person. 

Felicia, a friend of mine, is a talented trial lawyer who is mar¬ 
ried to a local TV-show host. Because Tom is on television, peo¬ 
ple recognize him wherever they go, and Felicia gets ignored. 
Felicia tells me how frustrating it is, even for Tom. Whenever they 
go to a party, people gush all over Tom, and Felicia’s fascinating 
work hardly ever gets mentioned. She and Tom used to love going 
out to dinner, but now they hide out at home in the evenings. 



138 How to Talk to Anyone 


Why? Because they can’t stand the interruptions of overly effer¬ 
vescent fans. 

“I Love What You Used to Be 
[You Has-Been]” 

Another sensitivity: the film star is probably obsessed with his last 
film, the politician with her last election, a corporate mogul with 
his last takeover, an author with her last novel—and so forth. So 
when discussing the star’s, the politicians, the mogul’s, the author’s, 
or any VIP’s work, try to keep your comments to current or recent 
work. Telling Woody Allen how much you loved his 1980 film 
Stardust Memories would not endear you to him. “What about all 
my wonderful films since?” thinks he. Stick to the present or very 
recent past if possible. 

Technique #36 

Big Shots Don’t Slobber 

People who are VIPs in their own right don’t slobber 
over celebrities. When you are chatting with one, don’t 
compliment her work, simply say how much pleasure or 
insight it’s given you. If you do single out any one of 
the star’s accomplishments, make sure it’s a recent one, 
not a memory that’s getting yellow in her scrapbook. 

If the queen bee has a drone sitting with her, find a 
way to involve him in the conversation. 


A final celebrity codicil: Suppose you are fortunate enough to 
have one at your party. To shine some star light on your party, 
don’t ask the TV host to “say a few words.” Don’t ask the singer 



How to Talk to a Celebrity 139 


to sing a song. What looks effortless to the rest of us because they 
seem so comfortable performing is work for them. You wouldn’t 
ask an accountant guest to look over your books. Or a dentist to 
check out your third left molar. Let the dignitary drink. Let the 
luminary laugh. Celebrities are people, too, and they like their 
time off. 




How to Make Them 
Want to Thank You 


To wrap up our section on sounding like the big boys and big girls, 
here is a simple and gracious little maneuver. It not only signals 
people you’re a top communicator, but it encourages them to keep 
doing nice things for you. Or complimenting you. Or doing busi¬ 
ness with you. Or loving you. It is very short. It is very sweet. It 
is very simple. You can use it with everyone in your life. When it 
becomes instinctive, you’ll find yourself using it every day. 

Very simply, never let the phrase thank you stand naked and 
alone. Always make it thank you for something. People use the 
bare exposed “thank you” so often that people don’t even hear it 
anymore. When we buy the morning newspaper, we flash a naked 
“thank you” at the vendor when he gives us our nickel’s change. Is 
that the same “thank you” you want to give a valued customer who 
makes a big purchase in your store? Or a loved one who cooks you 
a delicious dinner? 

Whenever the occasion warrants more than an unconscious 
acknowledgment, dress up your “thank you” with the reason: 

Thank you for coming. 

Thank you for being so understanding. 


140 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Make Them Want to Thank You 141 


Thank you for waiting. 

Thank you for being such a good customer. 

Thank you for being so loving. 

Often, when I disembark an airplane, the captain and first 
officer are standing by the cockpit door to bid the passengers 
farewell. I say, “Thanks for getting us here.” Admittedly, that’s car- 
rying “Never the Naked Thank You” technique to extremes, but 
it has a surprising effect. They fall all over themselves with “Oh, 
thanks for flying with us!” 


Zb 


ECHNIQUE #37 

Never the Naked Thank You 


Never let the phrase “thank you” stand alone. From A 
to Z, always follow it with for: from “Thank you for 
asking” to “Thank you for zipping me up.” 


Thank you for reading this section of How to Talk to Anyone ! 
Now let us move on to another conversation challenge, how to talk 
knowledgeably with everyone—from groups of accountants to 
Zen Buddhists—no matter how little you might have in common. 



This page intentionally left blank. 



PART FOUR 

How to Be an Insider 
in Any Crowd 


What Are They All Talking About? 

Has it ever happened to you? Everyone at the party is speaking 
gobbledygook. They’re all discussing faulty audits, code con¬ 
straints, or the library market—and you have no idea what they’re 
talking about. It’s because everybody at the party is an accoun¬ 
tant, an architect, or a publisher—and you’re not. 

So you stand there with a pasty smile on your face, not open¬ 
ing your mouth. If you do, you fear the wrong thing will come 
out. Paranoia sets in. Everybody will snicker at you. You’re an out¬ 
sider. So you suffer in silence. 

In high school I suffered a massive case of Silent Outsider 
Syndrome, especially around males. All they wanted to talk about 
was cars. I knew nothing about cars. The only time I’d ever set 
foot in a “body shop” was to get a suntan. 

Well, one fateful day, Mama came home with a gift for me 
that transformed my teenage existence from shy to sociable. It was 
a book on all the current model cars and their differences over and 
under the hood. One reading, and I became fluent in Fords, 
Chevys, and Buicks. I no longer hyperventilated when boys said 
words like carburetor, alternator, camshaft, or exhaust manifold. I 

143 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



144 How to Talk to Anyone 


didn’t need to learn a lot, just enough to ask the right questions to 
get the guys talking. When I’d learned to speak “car” with the 
boys, it worked wonders for my social life. 

Cut to today. We grown-up boys and girls also have our 
favorite topics that usually involve our work or our hobbies. When 
we’re with people in our own field or who share our interests, we 
open up like small-town gossips. (Even engineers who have a con¬ 
stant case of cat-got-their-tongue start gabbing about greasy tur¬ 
bines and various projects when they’re together.) To outsiders, our 
conversation sounds like gobbledygook. But we know precisely 
what it’s about. It’s our own jobbeldygook or hobbydygook. 

You fear you’ll find yourself in a party of squash players when 
you’re the type of person who’d rather be in court than on court? 
Don’t panic hearing words like lobbing and hitting rails roll off the 
squash players’ tongues. So what if the only experience you’ve ever 
had with squash was the mashed acorn variety on your plate next 
to the turkey last Thanksgiving. All you need is the few techniques 
that follow. 

Just as anglers throw out a dragonfly to get the fish to bite, all 
you have to do is throw out the right questions to get people to 
open up. Dale Carnegie’s adage, “show sincere interest and people 
will talk,” only goes so far. As they say in poker, “it takes jacks or 
better to open.” And in conversation, it takes cursory knowledge 
or better about their field to get them to really open up. You must 
have knowledgeable curiosity, the kind that makes you sound like 
you’re worth talking to. 

In this section, we explore techniques that are “Open Sesames” 
to get people gabbing with you like an insider. 



3 $ How to Be a Modern- 
Day Renaissance Man 
or Woman 


Whenever friends visit my hometown, New York City, I warn 
them “Never ask anyone riding in the subway for directions.” 

“Because I’ll get mugged?” they fearfully ask. 

“No, just because you’ll never get where you’re going!” Most 
Big Apple subway riders know only two things about the subway: 
where they get on and where they get off. They know nothing about 
the rest of the system. Most people are like NYC strap-hangers 
when it comes to their hobbies and interests. They know their own 
pastimes, but all the others are like unvisited stations. 

My unmarried (and wishing she weren’t) friend Rita has a bad 
case of bowler’s thumb. Every Wednesday night she’s bowling up 
a storm with her friends. She is forever discussing her scores, her 
averages, and her high game. Another single and searching friend 
Walter is into white-water rafting. He talks endlessly with his pad¬ 
dling friends about which rivers he’s run, which outfitters he’s gone 
with, and which class rapids he prefers. Thinking my two single 
friends might hit it off, I introduced Walter the paddler to Rita 
the bowler and mentioned their respective passions. 

“Oh you’re a bowler!” said Walter. 

“Yes,” Rita smiled demurely, awaiting more questions about 
her big bowling turn-on. Walter was silent. 


H5 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



146 How to Talk to Anyone 


Masking her disappointment, Rita said, “Uh, Leil tells me 
you’re into water rafting.” Walter smiled proudly, awaiting further 
friendly interrogation on paddling. “Uh, that must be exciting. 
Isn’t it dangerous?” was the best Rita could do. 

“No, it’s not dangerous,” Walter patronizingly responded to 
her typical outsider’s question. Then the conversation died. 

During the deafening silence, I remember thinking, if Rita 
had run just one river, if Walter had bowled just one game, their 
lives might be different now. Conversation could have flowed, and 
who knows what else might have flowered. 


Go Fly a Kite! 

The “Scramble Therapy” technique is salvation from such disap¬ 
pointing encounters. It will transform you into a modern-day 
Renaissance man or woman who comfortably can discuss a vari¬ 
ety of interests. 

Scramble Therapy is, quite simply, scrambling up your life and 
participating in an activity you’d never think of indulging in. Just 
one out of every four weekends, do something totally out of your 
pattern. Do you usually play tennis on weekends? This weekend, 
go hiking. Do you usually go hiking? This weekend, take a ten¬ 
nis lesson. Do you bowl? Leave that to your buddies this time. 
Instead, go white-water rafting. Oh, you were planning on run¬ 
ning some rapids like you do every warm weekend? Forget it, go 
bowling. 

Go to a stamp exhibition. Go to a chess lecture. Go balloon¬ 
ing. Go bird-watching. Go to a pool hall. Go kayaking. Go fly a 
kite! Why? Because it will give you conversational fodder for the 
rest of your life. From that weekend on, you’ll sound like an 
insider with all the hikers, stamp collectors, ballooners, birders, 
billiards players, kayakers, and kitists you ever meet. Just by doing 
their activity once. 



How to Be a Modern-Day Renaissance Man or Woman 147 


If you take a piece of blue litmus paper and dip it in a huge 
vat of acid, the tip turns pink. If you take another blue litmus paper 
and dip it into just one minuscule drop of acid on a glass slide, the 
tip turns just as pink. Compare this to participating in an activity 
just one time. A sampling gives you 80 percent of the conversa¬ 
tional value. You learn the insider’s questions to ask. You start using 
the right terms. You’ll never be at a loss again when the subject of 
extracurricular interests comes up—which it always does. 


Do You Speak Scuba? 

I’m not a certified scuba diver. However, six years ago in Bermuda 
I saw a sign: “Resort Dives, $25, no Scuba experience necessary.” 
In just three hours, I received the best crash course in talking with 
scuba divers the world offers. 

First I was given a quick lesson in the pool. Then, struggling 
to stay erect under the weight of my oxygen tank, regulator, buoy¬ 
ancy compensator, and weight belt, I went clumping out to the 
dive boat. Sitting there on the rocking dinghy, fondling my mask 
and fins like worry beads, I overheard the certified divers asking 
each other insider questions: 

“Where were you certified '?” 

“Where have you dived ?” 

“Do you prefer wrecks or reefisT 

“Ever done any night diving ?’ 

“Are you into underwater photography ?” 

“Do you dive on a computer ?” 

“What’s your longest bottom time ?” 

“Did you ever get the bendsT ’ 



148 How to Talk to Anyone 


Why the italicized words? Those are scuba lingo. I now speak 
scuba. To this day, whenever I meet divers, I have the right ques¬ 
tions to ask and subjects to discuss. And the right ones to avoid. 
(Like how much I like seafood. That’s like telling a cat lover how 
much you love tender barbecued kitten.) I can now ask my new 
friends which of the scuba hot spots they’ve been to—Cozumel, 
Cayman, Cancun. Then, if I want to really show off, I ask if 
they’ve been to Truk Lagoon in the Far Pacific, the Great Barrier 
Reef in Australia, or the Red Sea. 

All the insider terms now roll comfortably off my tongue. 
Before my Scramble Therapy experience I’d be calling their 
beloved wrecks and reefs “sunken ships” and “coral.” Under¬ 
standable words, but not scuba words. Not insider words. Upon 
meeting a scuba diver, I probably would have asked, “Oh scuba 
diving. That must be interesting. Uh, aren’t you afraid of sharks?” 
Not a good way to get off on the right fin with a diver. 


-V 


ECHNIQUE 


#38 


Scramble Therapy 


Once a month, scramble your life. Do something you’d 
never dream of doing. Participate in a sport, go to an 
exhibition, hear a lecture on something totally out of 
your experience. You get 80 percent of the right lingo 
and insider questions from just one exposure. 


Think about it! Suppose at a dinner party, the table conversa¬ 
tion turns to scuba diving. If you, too, had done your one-time- 
only dive, you’d ask your diving dinner companion if he likes night 
diving or whether he prefers diving on wrecks or reefs. (He’ll never 



How to Be a Modern-Day Renaissance Man or Woman 149 


believe it when you tell him the deepest water you’ve ever sub¬ 
merged yourself in is your own bathtub.) 

Then you turn to the bungee jumper seated on your left and 
ask him, “Do you prefer chest-waist jumps or ankle jumps?” If the 
conversation then changes to tennis, or martial arts, or chess, or 
coin collecting, or even bird-watching, you can keep up and keep 
the conversation going. What a guy! What a gal! 



# How to Sound Like You 
know All About Their 
Job or Hobby 


Even more insidious than hobby-talk is job-speak, or “Jobbledy- 
gook.” I still harbor social nightmares of the evening I attended a 
party thrown by a couple who worked in computer database man¬ 
agement. As I walked in the door, I overheard one chap saying to 
another, “When the domain relational calculus is restricted to safe 
expressions, it’s equivalent to the turple relational. ...” 

That’s all I stayed around for. I knew I wasn’t going to under¬ 
stand one bit or byte of conversation the rest of the evening. It 
made me long for the days when a mouse meant the furry little 
fellow who loves cheese, windows were the kind you bought 
drapes for, and the web was something spiders trapped flies in. I 
knew I was going to need some technical support if I was going 
to be compatible with this crowd. 

I decided then and there to learn some of the opening ques¬ 
tions database management types ask each other. Which I did. 
Now I can’t wait for a second chance at that crowd because I’m 
armed with questions like “What raid level are you using?” and 
“What data warehousing product do you use?” 

All you need are a few insider opening questions to get you 
started with any group. You ask questions, listen to the responses, 
and indulge in elementary on-target conversation with them for a 


ISO 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Sound Like You Know All About Their Job or Hobby iyi 


moment or two about their field. (Then change the subject ASAP! 
You don’t want to fake you are more knowledgeable about their 
field than you really are.) 


It’s All in the Opening Question 

A tennis player can tell immediately from just appraising your 
opening serve how good a player you are. Is it going to be great 
playing with you or a real bore? It’s the same in communicating. 
Just from your verbal opening serve, someone knows if it’s going 
to be interesting talking with you about their life or interests—or 
dull, dull, dull. 

For example, suppose I’m introduced to someone and the first 
words out of her mouth are, “Oh, you’re a writer. When are you 
going to write the great American novel?” Yikes, I know I’m talk¬ 
ing with someone who is unfamiliar with my world. We’ll chat, but 
I prefer to change the subject. And soon, my conversation partner. 

If, however, my new acquaintance says, “Oh you’re a writer. 
Do you write fiction or nonfiction?” Bingo! Now I know I’m with 
a person who knows about my world. Why? Because that is the 
first question all writers ask each other. I enjoy talking to this 
inquisitor because I presume she has more insights into the writ¬ 
ing world. Even if we quickly get off the subject of writing, she 
has come across as a well-informed individual. 

Every job, every sport, every interest has insider opening ques¬ 
tions that everybody in the same field asks—and its dumb out¬ 
sider questions that they never ask each other. When an astronaut 
meets another astronaut, he asks, “What missions have you been 
on?” (Never “How do you go to the bathroom up there?”) A den¬ 
tist asks another dentist, “Are you in general practice or do you 
have a specialty?” (Never “Heard any good pain jokes lately?”) 

The good news is beginning Jobbledygook is an easy language. 
You don’t need to master buzzwords, only a few opening questions 



i$2 How to Talk to Anyone 


to make you sound like an insider. Then—here’s the fun part— 
when you tell them you’re not connected to their field, they’re all 
the more impressed. “What a knowledgeable person!” they say to 
themselves. 

“Help! Everybody There Will Be 
an Artist” 

It’s not hard to harvest good Jobbledygook. Let’s say you’ve been 
invited to a gallery opening where you’ll be meeting many artists. 
If you don’t speak artist, go through your Rolodex to see if you 
have an artist friend or two. 

Aha, you found one. Well, sort of. Your friend Sally attended 
art school. You call her up and ask, “Sally, I know this sounds silly 
but I ’ve been invited to an event where I’m bound to be talking 
with a lot of artists. Could you give me a few good questions to 
ask?” Sally might find your query a tad unusual, but your diligence 
should impress her. 

Maybe she’ll say, “Well, ask artists what medium they work in.” 

“Medium?” you ask. 

“Sure,” she’ll tell you. “That’s the insider’s way to ask if they 
work with acrylics, oil, charcoal, pen, and so forth.” 

“Oh.” 

“Don’t ask artists to describe their work,” she warns. “They 
feel theirs is a visual medium that can’t be described.” 

“Oh.” 

“And don’t ask them if their work is in a gallery.” 

“Oh?” 

“That could be a sore point. Instead ask ‘Is there anyplace I 
might see your work?’ They’ll love that because, even if they’re 
not represented by a gallery, they can invite you to their studio to 
possibly buy their work.” 



How to Sound Like You Know All About Their Job or Hobby 153 


A. 


ECHNIQUE #39 

Learn a Little Jobbledygook 


Big winners speak Jobbledygook as a second language. 
What is Jobbledygook? It’s the language of other 
professions. 

Why speak it? It makes you sound like an insider. 

How do you learn it? You’ll find no Jobbledygook 
cassettes in the language section of your bookstore, but 
the lingo is easy to pick up. Simply ask a friend who 
speaks the lingo of the crowd you’ll be with to teach 
you a few opening questions. The words are few and 
the rewards are manifold. 


That’s all you need to get started—two good opening art 
questions and a warning against the most-asked dumb outsider 
question. 

Let’s say you’ve given a great opening serve with the right 
question on their job. You’ve slammed a swift ball dead center into 
their conversational court. Happily, thinking they’re with an ace 
player, they answer your question. Then they put a little spin on 
the ball and send it lobbing right back into your court and it’s time 
for a follow-up question. Whoops, what to do now? 

If you don’t want to come out of the bluffer’s closet just yet, 
you must master the next technique, “Baring Their Hot Button.” 



40 How to Bare Their Hot 
Button (Elementary 
Doc-Talk) 


My friend John, a physician, recently married a charming Japa¬ 
nese woman, Yamika. John told me the first time they were invited 
to a party to meet many of John’s colleagues, Yamika was panic- 
stricken. She wanted to make a good impression, yet she was tense 
about talking to American doctors. John was the only one she’d 
ever met, and during their romance they didn’t spend a whole lot 
of time discussing medicine. 

John told her, “Don’t worry about it, Yami. They all ask each 
other the same old questions. When you meet them, just ask, 
What’s your specialty’ and Are you affiliated with a hospital?’ 

“Then, to get into deeper conversation,” he continued, “throw 
out questions like ‘How’s your relationship with your hospital?’ or 
‘How’s the current medical environment affecting you?’ These are 
hot issues with doctors because everything’s changing in health 
care.” 

John said Yamika delivered the lines verbatim. She circulated 
the party asking the various doctors’ specialties and inquiring 
about their affiliations and relationships with their hospitals. As a 
result, she was the hit of the party. Many of John’s colleagues later 
congratulated him on having found such a charming and insight¬ 
ful woman. 


154 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Bare Their Hot Button (Elementary Doc-Talk) 155 


Getting the Real Grabber 

It’s not just doctors. Every profession has concerns that are all the 
buzz within the industry. The rest of the world, however, knows 
little about these fixations. For example, independent booksellers 
constantly complain that big superstore chains are taking over the 
industry. Accountants lie awake nights worrying about liability 
insurance for faulty audits. And dentists grind their teeth over 
OSHA and EPA regulations. Oh, us writers, too. Were always 
bellyaching about magazines not paying us for electronic rights to 
our precious words. 

Suppose some hapless soul were unlucky enough to find him¬ 
self in a party of writers. Making conversation with these folks 
(who seldom know what they think until they see what they say) 
is no easy task for one who is accustomed to communicating in 
the spoken word. However, if before the party the nonwriter had 
called just one writer acquaintance and asked about the burning 
issues, he’d have had hot conversation with the wordsmiths all eve¬ 
ning. I call the technique “Baring Their Hot Button.” 




ECHNIQUE #40 

Baring Their Hot Button 


Before jumping blindly into a bevy of bookbinders or a 
drove of dentists, find out what the hot issues are in 
their fields. Every industry has burning concerns the 
outside world knows little about. Ask your informant to 
bare the industry buzz. Then, to heat the conversation 
up, push those buttons. 


Back to the art show you’re about to attend. You can’t let Sally 
hang up yet. She’s given you the two best opening questions for 



156 How to Talk to Anyone 


artists. But don’t let her go until you get the real conversational 
grabber. Ask her the hottest issues going on in the art world. She 
might think a minute and then say, “Well, there’s always art prices.” 

“Art prices?” you ask. 

“Yes,” she explains. “For example, in the 1980s the art world 
was very market-driven. Prices went sky-high because some 
investors and status seekers paid exorbitant amounts. We feel that 
kind of took art away from the masses.” 

Wow, now you’re really armed with some good insider art talk! 

See You at the Big One! 

While you’re at it, don’t forget to grill your informant for special 
insider greetings to use when you’re with their gang. For example, 
actresses cringe if they hear “good luck” before a show, but they 
smile at well-wishers who say “Break a leg!” 

“Break a leg,” however, is not appropriate for runners before 
a marathon. That’s the last thought they want to have! The only 
thing they want to break is their personal record. Try “Have a per¬ 
sonal best!” 

Firefighters who work on shift seldom see each other except, 
of course, at the biggest blazes. Thus the firefighters’ greeting “See 
ya at the big one!” 

Once, driving in a sleepy town you’d have to work at getting 
lost in, I succeeded. I was hopelessly turned around. Happily, I 
spotted the firehouse and a couple of bored firefighters lounging 
out front. 

“Excuse me, can you tell me the way back to Route 50?” I 
called out the window. I could tell from their attitude they thought 
I was an idiot. Nevertheless, they lethargically pointed me in the 
right direction. As I drove off, I called out, “Thanks guys, see ya 
at the big one!” In the rearview mirror I saw huge smiles break out 
on their faces as they stood up in unison and waved good-bye. The 
disoriented dizzy blond driving off had won their respect with 
their insider salute. 




How to Secretly Learn 
About Their Lives 


Let’s say your paper carrier has just hurled the newspaper from his 
bike to your front door. You pour a cup of coffee and get com¬ 
fortable to catch up on what’s happening in the world. Your world, 
that is. Do you flip first to the international news? The fashion sec¬ 
tion? The sports page? The entertainment section? Maybe the 
comics? 

Whichever section you usually flip to first, tomorrow DON’T. 
Turn to any other section, preferably one you hardly ever read. 
Why? Because it will familiarize you with other worlds so that you 
can soon discuss anything with anybody, no matter how little you 
have in common. 

How about the real estate section? Yawn. Maybe you don’t 
find real estate especially engrossing. However, sooner or later 
you’re going to find yourself with a group of people who are dis¬ 
cussing properties, deals, and today’s market. Scanning the real 
estate section just once every few weeks will keep you au courant 
with their conversation. 

The advertising column? Maybe you think the world would 
be a far, far better place without Madison Avenue. But your bot¬ 
tom line won’t be better off if you can’t hold your own discussing 
matters with the marketing maven you’ve just contracted to adver- 


L57 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



158 How to Talk to Anyone 


tise your company’s widgets. Just a few peeks at the advertising 
news section and you’ll soon be chatting about campaigns and cre¬ 
ative people, and doing print or TV Instead of saying words, you’ll 
be saying copy. Instead of the agency, you’ll be bandying about real 
insider terms like the shop. 

Using outsider words is one of the biggest giveaways that you 
are not in the know. On the ship, if a passenger asked any of my 
staff, “How long have you been working on the boat?” they’d 
squelch a groan. Cruise staffers proudly worked on a ship, and the 
word boat revealed the passenger as a real landlubber. 

The right word can perform conversational miracles. In the 
receiving line, whenever passengers asked our laconic captain, 
“When did you first become a master?” or “What was your first 
command?” he would hold up the entire line of people snaking 
around the ballroom waiting to shake his hand. Captain Cafiero 
would enthusiastically recount his naval history to the savvy 
inquirer who might have just learned the words master or com¬ 
mand last week in the newspaper shipping notices. (If the passen¬ 
ger had simply said, “How long have you been a captain?” or 
“What was your first boat?” he or she would have gotten the cap¬ 
tain’s usual Italian gentleman’s version of the bum’s rush.) 

Soon you’ll become addicted to the high that establishing rap¬ 
port with so many people gives you. All it takes is reading differ¬ 
ent sections of the newspaper. 


Pump Their Pulp for Even More Fuel 

Then, when you crave a bigger hit of insider lingo, start reading 
trade journals. Those are the closed-circulation magazines that go 
to members of various industries. Ask your friends in different jobs 
to lend you one so you’ll have even more fuel for the conversa¬ 
tional fire. 

All industries have one or two. You’ll see big glossy rags with 
names like Automotive News, Restaurant Business, Pool and Spa 



How to Secretly Learn About Their Lives iyp 


News, Trucking Industry, and even Hogs Today for people in the pig 
business. (Excuse me, they call themselves “swine practitioners.” 
Hey, you never know when, to make your next big sale, it will help 
to speak pig.) Any one issue will give you a sample of their lingo 
and inform you of the hottest issues in that field. 

When it comes to people’s hobbies and interests, browse 
through magazines on running, working out, bicycling, skiing, 
swimming, and surfing. Large magazine stores carry biker rags, 
boxer rags, bowler rags, even bull-riding rags. You’ll find thousands 
of special-interest magazines published every month. 

Several years ago, I got hooked on buying a different one each 
week. It paid off quickly when a potential consulting client invited 
me to dinner at her home. She had a beautiful garden and, thanks 
to Flower and Garden Magazine, I could throw out insider terms 
like ornamentals, annuals, and perennials. I could even keep up 
when the discussion turned to the advantages of growing from 
seeds or bulbs. 

Because I was so fluent in “flower,” she invited me to take a 
longer walk with her to see her private back gardens. As we 




ECHNIQUE #41 

Read Their Rags 


Is your next big client a golfer, runner, swimmer, surfer, 
or skier? Are you attending a social function filled with 
accountants or Zen Buddhists—or anything in between? 
There are untold thousands of monthly magazines 
serving every imaginable interest. You can dish up more 
information than you’ll ever need to sound like an 
insider with anyone just by reading the rags that serve 
their racket. (Have you read your latest copy of 
Zoonooz yet?) 



160 How to Talk to Anyone 


strolled, I gradually changed the subject from chrysanthemums to 
the consulting work I could do for her company. Who was lead¬ 
ing whom down the garden path? 

Is the world getting smaller, or are we getting bigger? Today’s 
Renaissance man or woman is comfortable and confident any¬ 
where. The next technique helps you be an insider wherever you 
find yourself on the planet, and it saves you from fulfilling the 
world’s fantasy of “the ugly American.” 



How to Talk When 
You’re in Other 
Countries 

Say you’re traveling abroad on business and you want to be a 
“global insider.” What’s the first thing on your to-do list? Get a 
passport and a phrase book, right? After all, who wants to wander 
around Rome not knowing how to ask for a restroom? Or be 
thirsty in Kuala Lumpur not knowing how to ask for a soda? How¬ 
ever, there’s something most of us forget to pack, often with dire 
consequences—a book on international customs. 

A friend of mine, a fellow speaker named Geraldine, was 
excited about her first speech in Japan. To be comfy on her long 
flight to Tokyo, she donned her favorite designer jeans and a casual 
jacket. Fourteen hours and 6,737 rniles later, four impeccably 
dressed Japanese gentlemen greeted her at Narita Airport. Smil¬ 
ing and bowing low, they handed her their business cards. With 
her carry-on bag in one hand, Geri took their cards with the other. 
She thanked them, glanced briefly at the cards, and packed them 
safely into her back pocket. She then pulled one of her business 
cards out of her purse and, sensitive to the fact that they might 
have difficulty pronouncing Geraldine, wrote her nickname “Geri” 
above her printed name. The gentlemen hovered over her card, 
turning it over to examine it a few times, before one of them put 
it in his briefcase. 


161 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



162 How to Talk to Anyone 


When the five of them arrived at the hotel, they invited Geri 
for tea in the lobby. While sipping tea, the gentlemen presented 
her with a small gift which she eagerly opened. One of Geri’s most 
charming qualities is her instinctive warmth and effusiveness. She 
was thrilled with the gift and, in typical Geri style, she squealed, 
“Oh, it’s beautiful!” as she gave each of the gentlemen a little hug. 

At this point, the four Japanese gentlemen stood up in uni¬ 
son like four frowning Siamese twins and, bowing only very 
slightly, mumbled “Sayonara” and promptly left. Poor Geri was 
flabbergasted. What did she do wrong? 

Everything! First, the jeans. Even if you’re coming off a bicy¬ 
cle in Asia, you do not meet clients casually dressed. The second 
mistake was Geri’s vulgar handling of their business cards. In Asia, 
the business card is one of the most important protocol tools. It 
is always presented and accepted reverently with both hands. 
(Except in Moslem Asia where the left hand is considered 
unclean.) 

Geri then put their cards away much too quickly. In Asia, peo¬ 
ple use business cards as a conversation starter. You chat about each 
other’s cards and work and do not put theirs away until they gen¬ 
tly and respectfully place yours in safekeeping. Shoving it into her 
back jeans pocket was the ultimate disrespect. 

Geri didn’t discover her fourth gaffe until she returned home. 
One of her colleagues Bill, a seasoned business traveler, analyzed 
the fiasco for her. Bill told her the reason the gentlemen had turned 
Geraldine’s card over and over when she gave it to them at the air¬ 
port was to find her name, title, and company printed in Japanese 
on the other side. The flip side of Geri’s card was, of course, blank. 

Then, fifth horror of horrors, Geri should not have written on 
the card. Cards in Asia are not exactly sacred, but one should never 
deface them with messy handwriting. 

The sad tale of Geri and the Japanese gets worse. Bill broke 
the bad news to her: she should not have opened the gift in front 



Hoiv to Talk When You’re in Other Countries 163 


of her clients. Why? Because in a land where saving face is criti¬ 
cal, it would be embarrassing to discover the gift they gave was 
not as nice as the one they received. (Yikes, Geri hadn’t even given 
them a gift!) Gaffe number seven. 

Geri’s little squeal when receiving the gift was also a boo-boo. 
In Asia, the lower the tone of voice, the higher the rank. The final 
flub was, of course, giving the gentlemen a thank-you hug. Hug¬ 
ging, highly revered in certain parts of the world is, in Japan, abso¬ 
lutely unacceptable with a new client. 

Needless to say, Geri has not been invited back to Japan. 
However, she does have a gig coming up in El Salvador. This time 
she’s smart. She’s studying up on the customs there. Happily, she’s 
finding she can hug to her heart’s content. However she shouldn’t 
use her (or anybody else’s) first name. Oh, and she must not intro¬ 
duce herself as an “American.” After all, Salvadorans are Ameri¬ 
cans, too! 

The differences ’round the world go on and on. Whenever I 
travel, I have to hit myself over the head and realize I’m not in the 
anything-goes of USA. I love to travel in jeans, I’m an incurable 
hugger, and I can’t wait to see what’s in a gift box anybody gives 
me. However, whenever I plan to leave Uncle Sam’s shores, I check 
on foreign customs to see how much of myself I can be. 


-1 


ECHNIQUE #42 

Clear “Customs” 


Before putting one toe on foreign soil, get a book on 
dos and taboos around the world. Before you shake 
hands, give a gift, make gestures, or even compliment 
anyone’s possessions, check it out. Your gaffe could gum 
up your entire gig. 



164 How to Talk to Anyone 


There are some excellent books on international customs. 
You’ll find the names of a few in the notes. 17-19 

Don’t be like another hapless colleague of mine who almost 
blew a big business deal with a Brazilian. Just before signing the 
contract, he gave the OK sign with his thumb and forefinger. Lit¬ 
tle did he know he was telling his new business partner to go have 
intercourse with himself. You never know until it’s too late. 

Now we come to where being an insider shows immediate, 
tangible, and calculable rewards. And where being an outsider 
really hurts—right in your pocket or purse. 



43 How to Talk Them into 
Getting the “Insiders 
Price” (on Practically 
Anything You Buy) 


Never underestimate human ingenuity when it comes to getting 
what you want. Many people expand the adage, “All’s fair in love 
and war” to “All is fair in love, war, and buying what I want.” To 
get a table at a posh restaurant on a busy night, using a celebrity 
name is an old ploy. My favorite maitre d’ told me he gets a lot of 
Robert De Niros phoning in a reservation. When their party of 
six or eight arrives, he hears, “I’m so sorry, Rob wasn’t feeling well 
this evening.” 

One woman, frustrated when her fake celebrity name didn’t 
work, shouted at him, “Look, who the hell do I have to be to get a 
table? I’ll be anyone you want me to be, Goldie Hawn, Steffi Graf, 
Fergie—just tell me.” Some people try a last-minute approach. 
They simply walk up to the maitre d’ at an overbooked restaurant, 
point to any name on the reservation book and say, “That’s us.” 

You’ll witness the same cunning at overbooked hotels. Several 
months ago I was checking into a popular hotel for which, fortu¬ 
nately, I had a confirmed reservation. A loudmouthed man in front 


165 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



166 How to Talk to Anyone 


of me in line shouted at the desk clerk, “Whaddaya mean, no room? 
I’m staying in this hotel tonight. If you don’t have a room, I’m sleep¬ 
ing right here on the floor.” His temper tantrum was not working. 

“And I warn you,” he continued, “I sleep in the nude!” 

He got a room. 

These crafty childish tactics are not recommended. Rather, I 
suggest a more principled technique called “Bluffing for Bargains.” 
It was born one afternoon sitting with an insurance broker Mr. 
Carson. He was trying to sell me a homeowners policy. Of course 
I wanted the most coverage for the least cash. Carson was a 
smooth operator and he was patiently explaining to me in layman’s 
terms the benefits of certain riders he was pushing. 

Just as he started discussing disasters like wars and hurricanes, 
his phone rang. With apologies, he picked up the receiver. It was 
one of his colleagues. Suddenly a metamorphosis took place before 
my eyes. The sophisticated salesman became a palsy-walsy, regu¬ 
lar, down-home kinda guy chatting it up with his old buddy about 
umbrellas. I thought they were discussing the weather. 

Then the conversation turned to floaters. I now assumed they 
were talking about an eye problem. It took a while for me to real¬ 
ize that umbrella policies and floaters were part of the insurancese 
they were speaking. 

A few minutes later, Carson said, “Yeah, OK, so long, buddy,” 
and put the phone down. He cleared his throat and again trans¬ 
mogrified back into the formal sales agent patiently defining dam¬ 
ages and deductibles to a naive client. 

Sitting there listening to bafflegab like subrogation and pro 
rata liability, I began to ponder, “If Carson’s colleague who just 
called wanted to buy insurance, he would have gotten a much 
better policy, much cheaper.” In practically every industry, ven¬ 
dors give two prices on goods or services—one to insiders and 
one to you and me. 



How to Talk Them into Getting the “Insider’s Price” 167 


Before I let myself get angry about this, I thought it through. 
Is it unfair? Not really. If the vendor doesn’t have to spend time 
being salesman or psychologist answering the endless stream of 
novice questions, he can afford to give his best price. Carson 
wouldn’t have had to take twenty minutes explaining to his col¬ 
league (as he did to me) why, if a tornado takes your house, it’s 
considered “an act of God.” Therefore, you lose. When knowl¬ 
edgeable associates buy products, the vendor is happily reduced to 
nothing more than a purchasing agent. For very little work, he 
makes a small profit and is satisfied. 

A little bit of knowledge goes a long way when you’re buying 
something. If you have insight into your real estate broker’s bot¬ 
tom line, he’s more apt to give you the better price. If you are facile 
with the insider words caterers and car salesmen use to pad their 
profits, if you’re savvy to techniques moving companies and 
mechanics use to bilk the unsuspecting, if you are on the lookout 
for lawyers’ methods of fattening fees—in short, if you know the 
ropes, you will not get ripped off. You don’t need to know a lot, 
just a few insider terms. The pro assumes, since you are conver¬ 
sant in some esoteric industry terms, you also know the best deal 
and rock-bottom price. 

No one put it better than my housepainter, Iggy. “Sure,” he 
told me, “you gotta know how to talk to a painter. Not me, but a 
lotta them other guys, they’re gonna get whatever they can. It’s only 
human nature. Especially if you’re a woman and you deal with ’em 
smart, like I’m gonna tell you how, their hair will stand on end. 
They’ll say to themselves, ‘Hey, dis is no babe in the woods. I bet¬ 
ter deal straight.’ ” 

“OK, Iggy, how?” 

He said, “Tell them guys, ‘Look the walls need very little prep- 
ping. You’re not going to have to spend much time scraping and 
spackling. It’s a clean job.’ ” Iggy told me these few sentences alone 



168 How to Talk to Anyone 


can save you hundreds of dollars. Why? Right away the painter 
knows you know the score and that the most time-consuming part 
for him is preparing the surface (prepping in painterese). There¬ 
fore, it’s his biggest markup item. 

“Then,” Iggy continued, “when you tell ’em there will be no 
cutting in [painting two colors next to each other], your price goes 
down again. Be sure and tell ’em not to leave any holidays 
[unpainted or sparsely painted spots] and you get a more careful 
job.” I’m only sorry I don’t have an Iggy in every field to give me 
a crash course in how to deal. 

How to Deal When There’s No Iggy 
in Your Life 

Here’s how to get the best price and the best deal from anyone. 
Find your Iggy Informer. If you have a friend in the business, get 
the lingo from him. If not, instead of going straight to the vendor 
you want to buy from, visit several others first. Talk with them. 
Learn a little lingo from each. 

For instance, suppose you want to buy a diamond. Instead of 
going right to your favorite jewelry shop and asking dumbbell dia¬ 
mond questions, go to the competition. Make friends with the 
salesclerk and pick up a few gems of diamondese. You’ll learn jew¬ 
elers say stones, not diamonds. When you’re talking about the top 
of the stone, they say table-, the widest part is the girdle-, the bot¬ 
tom is the cutlet. If the stone looks yellow, don’t say yellow, say 
cape. If you see flaws, don’t say flaws, say inclusions or gletz. If you 
still don’t like the stone, don’t say “I’d like to see something bet¬ 
ter ,say finer. (Don’t ask me why. That’s just the way the diamond 
crowd talks.) 

Then, when you’ve got your lingo down, go to where you 
want to buy. Because you now speak diamond, you get a much 
better price. 



How to Talk Them into Getting the “Insider’s Price” 169 




ECHNIQUE #43 

Bluffing for Bargains 


The haggling skills used in ancient Arab markets are 
alive and well in contemporary America for big-ticket 
items. Your price is much lower when you know how 
to deal. 

Before every big purchase, find several vendors—a 
few to learn from and one to buy from. Armed with a 
few words of industryese, you’re ready to head for the 
store where you’re going to buy. 


Soon you’ll be asking furriers where the skins were dressed, 
moving companies for their ICC performance record, and lawyers 
the hourly rate of paralegals and associates. Then these folks, like 
Iggy the painter, will say to themselves, “Hey, dis is no babe in the 
woods—I better deal straight.” 

Let us now delve deeper into the world of being an insider. 
This time we explore how to give your conversation partner the 
sense that you share not only experiences but the heavy stuff. You 
share beliefs and values in life. 



This page intentionally left blank. 



PART FIVE 

How to Sound 
Like You’re Peas 
in a Pod 

“Why, Were Just Alike!” 

If you squint your eyes and look up carefully at a flight of birds, 
you’ll see finches flying with finches, swallows soaring with swal¬ 
lows, and yellow birds winging it with yellow birds. The avian 
apartheid escalates. You’ll never see a barn swallow with a bank 
swallow, or even a yellow bird hanging out with a yellow finch. 
Somebody said it shorter: Birds of a feather flock together. 

Happily, humans are smarter than birds. In one respect, at 
least: we have brains capable of overcoming bias. Really smart 
human beings work together, play together, and break bread 
together. Does that mean their comfort level is high? Well, that 
depends on the human being. Our purpose here is not to exam¬ 
ine the absurdity of apartheid. It is to leave no stone unturned in 
making sure people are completely comfortable doing business or 
pleasure with you. 

It has been proven beyond a doubt, people are most recep¬ 
tive to those they feel have the same values in life. In one study, 

I 7 I 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



ij2 How to Talk to Anyone 


individuals were first given a personality and beliefs test. 20 They 
were then paired off with a partner and told to go spend time 
together. Before meeting, half the couples were told they were very 
similar in beliefs to their partner. The other half were told they 
were dissimilar. Neither statement was true. 

However, when quizzed afterward on how much they liked 
each other, partners who believed they were similar liked each 
other a lot more than the couples who thought themselves to be 
dissimilar, demonstrating we have a predisposition toward people 
we believe are just like us. We are most comfortable giving our 
business and friendship to those we feel share our values and 
beliefs in life. To that end I offer six techniques to create sensa¬ 
tions of similarity with everyone you wish. 

Along with making more profound rapport with customers, 
friends, and associates, using the following techniques develops a 
deeper understanding and empathy with people of all races and 
backgrounds. It also opens doors that might otherwise be closed 
to you. 



44 How to Make Them 
Feel You’re of the 
Same “Gass” 


Just like the finch flaps its wings faster than the gliding eagle, peo¬ 
ple of different backgrounds move differently. For example, West¬ 
erners used to the wide-open plains stand farther from each other. 
Easterners, systematically sardined into subways and crowded 
busses, stand closer. Asian Americans make modest movements. 
Italian Americans make massive ones. 

At teatime, the finishing-school set genuflects and gracefully 
lowers derrieres onto the sofa. When the ladies reach for a cup, 
they hold the saucer in one hand and the cup in the other, pinkie 
ever so slightly extended. Folks who never finished any manners 
school make a fanny dive in the middle of the sofa and clutch the 
cup with both hands. 

Is one right? Is the other wrong? No. However, top commu¬ 
nicators know when doing business with a derriere-dipping pinkie 
extender or a fanny-plopping, two-fisted mug grabber, they darn 
well should do the same. People feel comfortable around people 
who move just like they do. 

I have a friend who travels the country giving an outrageous 
seminar called “How to Marry the Rich.” Genie was once in a Las 
Vegas casino when a television reporter asked if she could tell the 
real rich from the great pretenders. 


173 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



iy4 How to Talk to Anyone 


“Of course,” Genie answered. 

“All right,” challenged the reporter. “Who is the wealthiest 
man in this room?” Convened at the next table were three men in 
tailored suits (Hayward of Mayfair, London, no doubt), hand¬ 
made shirts (Charvet of Place Vendome in Paris, no doubt), and 
sipping scotch (single-malt Laphroaig from the Scottish island of 
Islay, no doubt). The reporter, naturally, assumed Genie would 
choose one of these likely candidates. 

Instead, with the scrutiny of a hunting dog, Genie’s eyes 
scanned the room. Like a trained basset hound, she instinctively 
pointed a long red fingernail at a fellow in torn jeans at a corner 
table. She murmured, “He’s very rich.” 

Flabbergasted, the reporter asked Genie, “How can you tell?” 
“He moves like old money,” she said. “You see,” Genie went 
on to explain, “there’s moving like old money. There’s moving like 
new money. And there’s moving like no money.” Genie could tell 
the unlikely chap in the corner was obviously sitting on big assets 
and all because of the way he moved. 

YK 

Technique #44 

Be a Copyclass 

Watch people. Look at the way they move. Small 
movements? Big movements? Fast? Slow? Jerky? Fluid? 

Old? Young? Classy? Trashy? 

Pretend the person you are talking to is your dance 
instructor. Is he a jazzy mover? Is she a balletic mover? 

Watch his or her body, then imitate the style of 
movement. That makes your conversation partner 
subliminally real comfy with you. 



How to Make Them Feel You’re of the Same “Class” iy$ 


They’re Buying You, Too 

If you’re in sales, copy not only your customer’s class but the class 
of your product as well. I live in a section of New York City called 
Soho, which is a few blocks above the famous-for-being-trashy 
Canal Street. Often, clutching my purse tightly and dodging the 
crowds on Canal Street, I’ll pass a pickpocket-turned-salesman- 
for-the-day. He furtively looks around and flashes a greasy hand¬ 
kerchief at me with a piece of jewelry on it. “Psst, wanna buy a 
gold chain?” His nervous thief’s demeanor alone could get him 
arrested. 

Now, about sixty blocks uptown, you’ll find the fashionable 
and very expensive Tiffany’s jewelry store. Occasionally, clutching 
my fantasies of being able to afford something therein, I stroll 
through the huge gilt doors. Imagine one of the impeccably 
dressed sales professionals behind the beveled glass counters 
furtively looking around and saying to me, “Psst, wanna buy a 
diamond?” 

No sale! 

Match your personality to your product. Selling handmade 
suits? A little decorum please. Selling jeans? A little cool, please. 
Selling sweat suits? A little sporty, please. And so on for whatever 
you’re selling. Remember, you are your customers’ buying experi¬ 
ence. Therefore you are part of the product they’re buying. 



45 How to Make Them 
Feel That You’re 
Like “Family” 


Have you ever been gabbing with a new acquaintance and, after a 
few moments, you’ve said to yourself, “This person and I think 
alike! We’re on the same wavelength.” It’s a fabulous feeling, almost 
like falling in love. 

Lovers call it “chemistry.” New friends talk of “instant rap¬ 
port,” and businesspeople say a “meeting of minds.” Yet it’s the 
same magic, that sudden sense of warmth and closeness, that 
strange sensation of “Wow, we were old friends at once!” 

When we were children, making friends was easier. Most of 
the kids we met grew up in the same town and so they were on our 
wavelength. Then the years went by. We grew older. We moved 
away. Our backgrounds, our experiences, our goals, our lifestyles 
became diverse. Thus, we fell off each other’s wavelengths. 

Wouldn’t it be great to have a magic surfboard to help you 
hop right back on everybody’s wavelength whenever you wanted? 
Here it is, a linguistic device that gets you riding on high rapport 
with everyone you meet. If you stand on a mountain cliff and 
shout “hello-oh” across the valley, your identical “hello-oh” thun¬ 
ders back at you. I call the technique “Echoing” because, like the 
mountain, you echo your conversation partner’s precise words. 


176 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Make Them Feel That You’re Like “ Family” 177 


It All Started Across the Ocean 

In many European countries, you’ll hear five, ten, or more lan¬ 
guages within the language. For example, in Italy, the Sicilians 
from the south speak a dialect that seems like gobbledygook to 
northern Italians. In an Italian restaurant, I once overheard a diner 
discover his waiter was also from Udine, a town in northeastern 
Italy where they speak the Friulano dialect. The diner stood up 
and hugged the waiter like he was a long-lost brother. They started 
babbling in a tongue that left the other Italian waiters shrugging. 

In America we have dialects, too. We just aren’t conscious of 
them. In fact we have thousands of different words, depending on 
our region, our job, our interests, and our upbringing. Once, when 
traveling across the country, I tried to order a soda like a Coke or 
7-Up in a highway diner. It took some explaining before the wait¬ 
ress understood I wanted what she called a “pop.” Perhaps because 
the English-speaking world is so large, Americans have a wider 
choice of words for the same old stuff than any language I’ve 
encountered. 

Family members find themselves speaking alike. Friends use 
the same words, and associates in a company or members in a club 
talk alike. Everyone you meet will have his or her own language 
that subliminally distinguishes them from outsiders. The words 
are all English, but they vary from area to area, industry to indus¬ 
try, and even family to family. 

The Linguistic Device That Says “We re 
on the Same Wavelength” 

When you want to give someone the subliminal feeling you’re just 
alike, use their words, not yours. Suppose you are selling a car to 
a young mother who tells you she is concerned about safety 
because she has a young “toddler.” When explaining the safety fea- 



1/8 How to Talk to Anyone 


tures of the car, use her word. Don’t use whatever word you call 
your kids. Don’t even say child-protection lock, which was in your 
sales manual. Tell your prospect, “No toddler can open the win¬ 
dow because of the driver’s control device.” Even call it a toddler- 
protection lock. When Mom hears toddler coming from your lips, 
she feels you are “family” because that’s how all her relatives refer 
to her little tyke. Suppose your prospect had said kid or infant. 
Fine, echo any word she used. (Well, almost any word. If she’d 
said my brat, you might want to pass on Echoing this time.) 


Echoing at Parties 

Let’s say you are at a party. It’s a huge bash with many different 
types of people. You are first chatting with a lawyer who tells you 
her profession is often maligned. When it comes your turn to speak, 
say profession too. If you say job, it puts a subconscious barrier 
between you. 

Next you meet a construction worker who starts talking about 
his job. Now you’re in trouble if you say, “Well, in my profession 
. . .” he’d think you were being hoity-toity. 

After the lawyer and the construction worker, you talk to sev¬ 
eral freelancers—first a model, then a professional speaker, finally 
a pop musician. All three of these folks will use different words for 
their work. The model brags about her bookings. The professional 
speaker might say bookings, but he is more apt to boast of his speak¬ 
ing engagements. A pop musician might say, “Yeah, man, I get a lot 
of gigs. ” It’s tough to memorize what they all call their work. Just 
keep your ears open and echo their word after they say it. 

Echoing goes beyond job names. For example if you are chat¬ 
ting with a boat owner and you call his boat an it, he labels you a 
real landlubber. (He reverently refers to his beloved boat, of 
course, as a she.) If you listen carefully, you hear language sub¬ 
tleties you never dreamed existed. Would you believe using the 
wrong synonym for a seemingly uncomplicated word like have 



Hoiu to Make Them Feel That You’re Like “Family” iyp 


labels you a know-nothing in somebody else’s world? For exam¬ 
ple, cat lovers purr about having cats. But horse people would say 
owning horses. And fish folk don’t own fish. They talk about keep¬ 
ing fish. Hey, no big deal. But if you use the wrong word, your 
conversation partner will assume, correctly, that you are a stranger 
in his or her hobbyland. 

The Peril of Not Echoing 

Sometimes you lose out by not Echoing. My friend Phil and I were 
talking with several guests at a party. One woman proudly told 
the group about the wonderful new ski chalet she had just pur¬ 
chased. She was looking forward to inviting her friends up to her 
little chalet in the mountains. 

“That’s wonderful,” said Phil, secretly hoping for an invita¬ 
tion. “Where exactly is your cabin?” KERPLUNK! There went 
Phil’s chances for an invitation to the lady’s chalet. 

I couldn’t resist. After the conversation, I whispered to my 
friend, “Phil, why did you insult that woman by calling her chalet 
a cabin?” Phil scratched his head and said, “What do you mean 
insult her? Cabin is a beautiful word. My family has a cabin in 
Cape Cod and I grew up loving the word, the associations, the joy 
of a cabin.” (In other words, the connotations of cabin.) Well, fine, 
Phil. The word cabin may be beautiful to you, but obviously the 
skier preferred the word chalet. 


Professional Echoing 

In today’s sales environment, customers expect salespeople to be 
problem solvers, not just vendors. They feel you don’t grasp their 
industry’s problems if you don’t speak their language. 

I have a friend, Penny, who sells office furniture. People in 
publishing, advertising, broadcasting, and a few lawyers are among 
her clients. Penny’s sales manual says office furniture. However, she 



180 How to Talk to Anyone 


told me, if she used the word office with all of her clients, they’d 
assume she knew nothing about their respective industries. 

She told me her client, the purchasing officer in advertising, 
talks about his advertising agency. Penny’s publishing client says 
publishing house. The lawyers talk about furniture for their firm, 
and her radio clients use the word station instead of office. “Hey,” 
Penny says, “it’s their salt mine. They can call it whatever the heck 
they please. And,” she added, “if I want to make the sale, I’d bet¬ 
ter call it the same thing.” 


4 * 


ECHNIQUE 


#45 


Echoing 


Echoing is a simple linguistic technique that packs a 
powerful wallop. Listen to the speaker’s arbitrary choice 
of nouns, verbs, prepositions, adjectives—and echo 
them back. Hearing their words come out of your 
mouth creates subliminal rapport. It makes them feel 
you share their values, their attitudes, their interests, 
their experiences. 


Echoing Is Politically Correct Insurance 

Here’s a quiz: You’re talking with a pharmacist and you ask her, 
“How long have you worked at the drugstore?” What’s wrong with 
that question? 

Give up? It’s the word drugstore. Pharmacists abhor the word 
because it conjures up many industry problems. They’re used to 
hearing it from outsiders, but it’s a tip-off that they are unaware 
of, or insensitive to, their professional problems. They prefer 
pharmacy. 



How to Make Them Feel That You’re Like “Family” 181 


Recently, at a reception, I introduced one of my friends, 
Susan, as a day-care worker. Afterward Susan begged, “Led, pul- 
eeze do not call me a day-care worker. Were child-care workers 
Whoops! Time and recent history quickly make certain terms 
archaic. 

A group’s intense preference for one word is not arbitrary. Cer¬ 
tain jobs, minorities, and special-interest groups often have a his¬ 
tory the public is not sensitive to. When that history has too much 
pain attached to it, people invent another word that doesn’t have 
bitter connotations. 

I have a dear friend, Leslie, who is in a wheelchair. She says 
whenever anyone says the word handicapped, she cringes. Leslie 
says it makes her feel less than whole. “We prefer you say person 
with a disability .” She then gave a moving explanation. “We peo¬ 
ple with disabilities are the same as every other able-bodied per¬ 
son. We say AB,” she added. “ABs go through life with all the same 
baggage we do. We just carry one extra piece, a disability.” 

It’s simple. It’s effective. To show respect and make people feel 
close to you, Echo their words. It makes you a more sensitive com¬ 
municator—and keeps you out of trouble every time. 



46 How to My Make It 
Gear to Them 


I recently had to make a presentation to fifteen men in a corpo¬ 
rate meeting. “OK,” I said to myself as I stood up, “fifteen Mar¬ 
tians and one Venusian.” No problem! I’d readMen Are from Mars, 
Women Are from Venus. I’d explored neurological differences in 
men’s and women’s brains. I knew all about gender-specific body- 
language signals. Hey, I teach communications differences. I was 
well prepared to talk to these men, get my point across, and fend 
any questions. 

Everything started out fine. I’d conceived my presentation 
clearly and concisely, developed each theme, and presented it flaw¬ 
lessly. Then, I sat down and confidently invited questions and open 
discussion. 

That’s when it fell apart. All I remember is a horrifying bar¬ 
rage of questions couched in football analogies. 

“Do you think we dropped the ball on that one?” one man 
asked. 

“Yeah,” another responded. “But can we make a fumble 
recovery?” 

Those two I understood. However, when it got to pass cov¬ 
erage and intentional grounding, I started to lose it. When one 


182 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Really Make It Clear to Them 183 


guy raved about a Hail Mary pass being needed to save the deal, 
I suffered the ultimate humiliation. I had to ask, “Uh, what does 
that mean?” The guys looked at each other knowingly and then 
smiled condescendingly as they explained it to me. 

That night I had sadistic fantasies of fifteen women running 
the company and one man left scratching his head as we bandied 
about childbirth analogies. 

“We won’t get his new proposal til the third trimester,” 
reports the account exec. 

“Yeah, but that’s six months away. Let’s get it by C-section,” 
responds the comptroller. 

“Why bother?” asks the marketing VP. “All his ideas are devel¬ 
oped in vitro anyway.” 

“I’m about to go into postpartum depression,” murmurs the 
CEO. The lone male employee is left as confused and humiliated 
as I was in the face of football analogies. 

Ahem, the aim of this book is not to feed fiendish fantasies, 
but to improve communications. To that end, I offer the follow¬ 
ing technique based on analogies, not just football analogies. 
Because old-boy analogies are unsportsman-like conduct with the 
girls. 


On-Target Analogies Hit Bull’s-Eye 

Analogies can be an effective communications tool—if you evoke 
images from the life of the person you are talking to. Men don’t 
use football analogies to obfuscate matters or to confuse women 
but to clarify situations for each other. Analogies from the sport 
bring situations to life for men because generally they watch more 
football than women. 

Moving on to other sports analogies: everyone knows what 
the speaker means when he or she hears, “We’ll never strike out 



184 How to Talk to Anyone 


with this solution.” Nevertheless, the image would be more com¬ 
pelling to a baseball fan as would analogies like “caught on the fly,” 
“hitting the dirt,” “or throwing a spit ball.” 

You’ve heard people say, “This solution is right on target.” We 
all understand it. But the phrasing would be more dramatic for 
archery enthusiasts. If your listener were a bowler, speaking of 
“gutter balls” or “big splits” would bring whatever you were dis¬ 
cussing to life. If your business buddies were basketball fans, 
analogies like “hook shot” or “air ball” would land right in their 
basket. If your client wrestles, saying “feints” and “scissor holds” 
would be the way to grab him. 

These analogies might sound far-fetched to you. But they are 
potent communications tools when they evoke your conversation 
partners world. Why not use the most powerful terms possible to 
get your point across and make the sale? I call the technique 
“Potent Imaging.” 




ECHNIQUE 


#46 


Potent Imaging 


Does your customer have a garden? Talk about “sowing 
the seeds for success.” Does your boss own a boat? Tell 
him or her about a concept that will “hold water” or 
“stay afloat.” Maybe he is a private pilot? Talk about a 
concept really “taking off.” She plays tennis? Tell her it 
really hits the “sweet spot.” 

Evoke your listener’s interests or lifestyle and weave 
images around it. To give your points more power and 
punch, use analogies from your listener’s world, not 
your own. Potent Imaging also tells your listeners you 
think like them and hints you share their interests. 



How to Really Make It Clear to Them 185 


Pardon me while I return momentarily to my sadistic fantasies 
of the hopelessly confused lone male employee. The all-female 
management team is now arguing the corporate strategy using, 
not football of course, but ballet analogies. 

“I say let’s do the corporate takeover allegro,” she suggests. 

“Nah, you gotta go adagio in these matters,” her colleague 
responds. 

“But what if they do a tour jete while were poised in fifth?” 

“C’mon did you ever see a good pas seul from their president?” 

The top woman settles it. “I say let’s just give him a little 
reverence, and then a grand battement in the balls.” 



47 How to Make Them 
Feel You Empathize 
(Without Just Saying 
“Yep, Uh Huh, Yeah”) 

While listening to someone talk, we often vocalize “uh huh” or 
purr throaty little “umm” sounds to reassure the speaker we have 
heard their words. In fact, with some it’s such a habit, the noises 
escape their throats unconsciously. My friend Phil is a consum¬ 
mate, constant, and incontinent “ummer” whenever I’m talking. 
Occasionally, if I’m feeling contentious after he’s given one of his 
agreeable “umms” in response to something I’ve said, I challenge 
him with, “OK, Phil, what did I say?” 

“Uh, well, gosh ...” Phil has no idea. It’s not his fault. He’s 
male. Men are especially guilty of the not-really-listening umm 
habit. Once, when I was on a monologue about nothing in par¬ 
ticular, Phil was on a real umm roll. To test his listening skills, I 
slipped in, “Yes, this afternoon I think I’ll go out and get tattooed 
all over my body.” 

Phil nodded his habitual “uh huh.” 

Well, umming is better than a blank stare. However, it’s not 
the choice of top communicators. Try replacing your umms with 
full-blown empathizers. 


186 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Make Them Feel You Empathize i8y 


What Are Empathizers? 

Empathizers are simple, short, supportive statements. Unlike “uh 
huh,” they are complete sentences such as “I can appreciate you 
decided to do that,” or “That really is exciting.” Empathizers can 
be one-sentence positive critiques like “Yes, that was the honor¬ 
able thing to do,” or “It’s charming you felt that way.” 

When you respond with complete sentences instead of the 
usual grunts, not only do you come across as more articulate, but 
your listener feels that you really understand. 


Zb 


ECHNIQUE #47 

Employ Empathizers 


Don’t be an unconscious ummer. Vocalize complete 
sentences to show your understanding. Dust your 
dialogue with phrases like “I see what you mean.” 
Sprinkle it with sentimental sparklers like “That’s a 
lovely thing to say.” Your empathy impresses your 
listeners and encourages them to continue. 


Of course, you pay a price. To use the right empathizers, you 
do need to listen. 

Now let’s fine-tune this technique and explore advanced 
empathizing. 



48 How to Make Them Think 
You See/Hear/Feel It 
Just the Way They Do 


About ten years ago, I had a roommate named Brenda. Brenda 
was a tap dance teacher who didn’t just tap dance to make a liv¬ 
ing. She lived to tap. Posters of Bill “Bojangles” Robinson and 
Charles “Honi” Coles plastered her walls. She didn’t walk around 
the house. She tapped her way from room to room. It was noisy, 
but at least, when a phone call came for Brenda, I never had trou¬ 
ble finding her. 

Once I asked Brenda when she got interested in tap. She said, 
“From the moment I first opened my ears.” Her ears? I thought, 
that’s strange. Most people say “from the moment I opened my 
eyes.” At that moment, I realized Brenda “saw” the world more 
through her ears than her eyes. 

We all perceive the world through five senses. We see the 
world. We hear the world. We feel the world. We smell the world. 
And we taste the world. Therefore, we talk in terms of those five 
senses. Proponents of neurolinguistic programming (NLP) tell us, 
for each person, one sense is stronger than others. For Brenda, it 
was her hearing. 

Brenda told me she grew up in a dark apartment below street 
level in New York City. She remembers, as an infant, hearing the 
pitter-patter of feet walking just above her crib on the sidewalk. 


188 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Make Them Think You See/Hear/Feel It Just the Way They Do i8p 


As a toddler, her tiny ears were bombarded with honking horns, 
shrieking sirens, and tire chains slapping the icy streets. She espe¬ 
cially remembers the clumpety-clomp of police horses’ hoofs on 
the pavement outside her window. Her first perceptions of the out¬ 
side world came to her through her ears. To this day, sound dom¬ 
inates her life. Brenda, the tap dancer, is an auditory person. 

Since neurolinguists suggest invoking our listener’s strongest 
sense, I tried a few auditory references on Brenda. Rather than 
saying, “That looks good to me,” I’d say “That sounds good.” 
Instead of saying, “I see what you mean,” I’d say, “I hear you.” 
When I used these auditory references, I felt she paid more 
attention. 

So I started listening very carefully to all my friends to dis¬ 
cover which was their primary perception. Sometimes I’d hear 
visual references like 

“I see what you mean.” 

“That looks good to me.” 

“I can’t picture myself doing that.” 

“I take a dim view of that idea.” 

“From my perspective . . .” 

Wow, I thought I was really on to something! 


A Wrinkle Develops 

But then, whoops, at other times, I’d hear that same friend say 
“Yeah, I hear you.” 

“Sure, that sounds good to me.” 

“I kept saying to myself it would work.” 



ipo How to Talk to Anyone 


“That has a negative ring to it.” 

“He really tuned out on the whole idea.” 

“Something tells me . . .” 

This wasn’t going to be quite as easy as I’d expected. However, 
I wasn’t ready to give up. 

Once, Brenda and I went skiing with several friends. That 
night we were at a party. One of our friends was telling a group 
of people, “The ski slopes were beautiful. Everything was so crys¬ 
tal clear and white.” 

“A visual person?” I asked myself. 

Another skier added, “The feel of the fresh snow on our faces 
was terrific.” 

“Aha, a kinesthetic person,” I mused silently. 

Sure enough, just then, Brenda said, “Today was so silent. The 
only sound you could hear was the wind in your ears as you came 
swooshing down the slopes.” That little riff convinced me there 
was something to it. 

However, I still found it difficult to discern one’s primary 
sense. 

A Simple Solution 

Here’s what I’ve found does work, and it doesn’t take too much 
detective work on your part. I call the technique “Anatomically 
Correct Empathizers,” and it’s easy to master. Unless it is obvious 
the person you are speaking with is primarily visual, auditory, or 
kinesthetic, simply respond in his or her mode of the moment. 
Match your empathizers to the current sense someone is talking 
through. For example, suppose a business colleague describing a 
financial plan says, “With this plan, we can see our way clear in 
six months.” Since this time she’s using primarily visual references, 



How to Make Them Think You See/Hear/Feel It Just the Way They Do ipi 


say “I see what you mean” or “You really have a clear picture of 
that situation.” 

If, instead, your colleague had said, “This plan has a good ring 
to it,” you’d substitute auditory empathizers like “It does sound 
great,” or “I hear you.” 

A third possibility. Suppose she had said, “I have a gut feeling 
this plan will work.” Now you give her a kinesthetic empathizer 
like “I can understand how you feel,” or “You have a good grasp 
of that problem.” 


Zb 


ECHNIQUE 


#48 


Anatomically Correct Empathizers 


What part of their anatomy are your associates talking 
through? Their eyes? Their ears? Their gut? 

For visual people, use visual empathizers to make 
them think you see the world the way they do. For 
auditory folks, use auditory empathizers to make them 
think you hear them loud and clear. For kinesthetic 
types, use kinesthetic empathizers to make them think 
you feel the same way they do. 


What about the other two senses, taste and smell? Well, I’ve 
never run up against any gustatory or olfactory types. But you 
could always compliment a chef by saying, “That’s a delicious 
idea.” And if you are talking to your dog (olfactory, of course), 
tell him “The whole idea stinks.” 

The next technique helps create affinity with a single word. 



49 How to Make’Em 
Think We (Instead of 
You vs. Me) 


By just eavesdropping for a few moments on any two people chat¬ 
ting, you could tell a lot about their relationship. You could tell if 
they were new acquaintances or old friends. You could tell whether 
a man and a woman were strangers or a couple. 

You wouldn’t even need to hear friends call each other “pal,” 
“buddy,” or “mate.” You wouldn’t need to hear a man and a 
woman whisper “dear,” “sweetheart,” or “turtle dove.” It wouldn’t 
matter what they were discussing or even their tone of voice. You 
could even be blindfolded and tell a lot about their relationship 
because the technique I’m about to share has nothing to do with 
body language. 

How? A fascinating progression of conversation unfolds as 
people become closer. Here’s how it develops: 

Level One: Cliches 

Two strangers talking together primarily toss cliches back and 
forth. For instance, when chatting about the universally agreed- 
upon world’s dullest subject—the weather—one stranger might 
say to the other, “Beautiful sunny weather we’ve been having.” Or, 
“Boy, some rain, huh?” That’s level one, cliches. 


Ip2 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Make 'Em Think We (Instead of You vs. Me) 193 


Level Two: Facts 

People who know each other but are just acquaintances often dis¬ 
cuss facts. “You know, Joe, we’ve had twice as many sunny days 
this year to date as last.” Or, “Yeah, well, we finally decided to put 
in a swimming pool to beat the heat.” 

Level Three: Feelings and 
Personal Questions 

When people become friends, they often express their feelings to 
each other, even on subjects as dull as the weather. “George, I just 
love these sunny days.” They also ask each other personal ques¬ 
tions: “How about you, Betty? Are you a sun person?” 

Level Four: We Statements 

Now we progress to the highest level of intimacy. This level is 
richer than facts and creates more rapport than feelings. It’s use 
and us statements. Friends discussing the weather might say, “If 
we keep having this good weather, it’ll be a great summer.” Lovers 
might say, “I hope this good weather keeps up for us so we can go 
swimming on our trip.” 

A technique to achieve the ultimate verbal intimacy grows out 
of this phenomenon. Simply use the word we prematurely. You can 
use it to make a client, a prospect, a stranger feel you are already 
friends. Use it to make a potential romantic partner feel the two 
of you are already an item. I call it the “Premature We.” In casual 
conversation, simply cut through levels one and two. Jump straight 
to three and four. 

Ask your prospect’s feelings on something the way you would 
query a friend. (“George, how do you feel about the new gover¬ 
nor?”) Then use the pronoun we when discussing anything that 
might affect the two of you. (“Do you think were going to pros- 



ip 4 How to Talk to Anyone 


per during his administration?”) Make it a point to concoct we 
sentences, the kind people instinctively reserve for friends, lovers, 
and other intimates. (“I think we’ll survive while the governor’s in 
office.”) 

The word we fosters togetherness. It makes the listener feel 
connected. It gives a subliminal feeling of “you and me against the 
cold, cold world.” When you prematurely say we or us, even to 
strangers, it subconsciously brings them closer. It subliminally hints 
you are already friends. At a party, you might say to someone 
standing behind you at the buffet line, “Hey, this looks great. They 
really laid out a nice spread for us." Or, “Uh-oh, were going to get 
fat if we let ourselves enjoy all of this.” 




ECHNIQUE #49 

The Premature We 


Create the sensation of intimacy with someone even if 
you’ve met just moments before. Scramble the signals 
in their psyche by skipping conversational levels one 
and two and cutting right to levels three and four. 
Elicit intimate feelings by using the magic words we, 
us, and our. 


Well, we have just explored how to copy our conversation 
partners’ movements with Be a Copyclass, echo their words, evoke 
Potent Images from their world, create a bond through their pri¬ 
mary sense with Anatomically Correct Empathizers, and establish 
subliminal friendship with words like we. 

What else do friends, lovers, and close associates have in com¬ 
mon? A history. The final technique in this section is a device to 
give a fairly new acquaintance the warm and fuzzy feeling the two 
of you have been together for a long, long time. 



s&lt;y How to Create a 
Friendly “Private Joke” 
with Them 


Lovers whisper phrases in each others’ ears that mean nothing to 
anyone but themselves. Friends crack up over a few words that 
sound like gobbledygook to anyone overhearing them. Close busi¬ 
ness associates chuckle about shared experiences. 

One company I’ve worked with has seen reengineering, 
empowerment, TQM, and team building come and go in one 
decade. At company parties, the employees never fail to crack up 
over the time when the whole company—managers to mail-room 
clerks—scrambled up a twenty-nine-foot pole together all in the 
name of team building. The CEO slipped down the pole and 
broke his big toe. At the next weekly meeting, the CEO shook his 
crutch and caustically announced, “No more team exercises!” 
Thus, the death of team building—and the birth of a private joke. 

Out of shared experiences like this, a company culture grows. 
These employees have a history and a language to go with it. To 
this day, whenever they want to put an abrupt end to any idea, 
they say, “Let’s shake a crutch at it” or “Let’s slide that one down 
the flagpole.” They all smile. Nobody knows what they mean 
except fellow employees. 

The playwright Neil Simon, sometimes with a single word, 
can make an entire Broadway audience understand two perform- 


m 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



ip 6 How to Talk to Anyone 


ers onstage are either married or longtime friends. The actor sim¬ 
ply says something to the actress that makes no sense to the audi¬ 
ence. Then both of them laugh uproariously. Everybody gets the 
message: these two people are an item. 

Every time my friend Daryl and I meet, we don’t say “Hello.” 
We say “Quack.” Why? We met at a party five years ago and, in 
our first conversation, Daryl told me he grew up on a duck farm. 
When I told him I’d never seen a duck farm, he performed the 
best human imitation of a duck I’d ever seen. He flipped his head 
side to side looking at me first out of one eye, then the other, all 
the while flapping his arms and quacking. I got such a laugh out 
of his performance that it inspired him to do a full flat-footed duck 
waddle for me. It was contagious. Together we waddled around 
the room flapping and quacking. We made absolute fools of our¬ 
selves that evening. 


4 * 


ECHNIQUE 


#50 


Instant History 


When you meet a stranger you’d like to make less a 
stranger, search for some special moment you shared 
during your first encounter. Then find a few words that 
reprieve the laugh, the warm smile, the good feelings 
the two of you felt. Now, just like old friends, you have 
a history together, an Instant History. 

With anyone you’d like to make part of your 
personal or professional future, look for special 
moments together. Then make them a refrain. 


The next day, my phone rang. I picked up the receiver to hear, 
not “Hello, this is Daryl,” but simply, “Quack.” I’m sure that’s 



How to Create a Friendly “Private Joke” with Them ipy 


what started our friendship. To this day, every time I hear his 
“Quack” on the phone, it floods me with happy, if a tad embar¬ 
rassing, memories. It recalls our history and renews our friendship 
no matter how long it’s been since we last quacked at each other. 

Now What’s Left? 

Chemistry, charisma, and confidence are three characteristics 
shared by big winners in all walks of life. Part One helped us make 
a dynamic, confident, and charismatic first impression with body 
language. In Part Two, we put smooth small-talk lyrics to our body 
ballet. Then in Part Three, we seized hints from the big boys and 
big girls so were contenders for life’s big league. Part Four rescued 
us from being tongue-tied with folks with whom we have very lit¬ 
tle in common. And in Part Five, we learned techniques to create 
instant chemistry, instant intimacy, instant rapport. 

What’s left? You guessed it—making people feel really good 
about themselves. But compliments are a dangerous weapon in 
today’s world. One mishandling and you can butcher the rela¬ 
tionship. Let us now explore the power of praise, the folly of flat¬ 
tery, and how you can use these potent tools effectively. 



This page intentionally left blank. 



PART SIX 

How to Differentiate 
the Power of Praise 
from the Folly of 
Flattery 

Kids are experts at getting what they want. Perched on Papas knee, 
“Oh Daddy, you’re so wunnerful. I know you’ll buy me that new 
doll.” The next morning, with Mama in the supermarket, “Oh 
Mommy, I love you. You’re the most bestest mommy in the world. 
I know you’ll buy me that chocolate munchie.” 

From the hungry infant’s instinctive cooing as Mommy 
approaches the crib to the car salesman’s calculated praise as the 
prospect walks into the showroom, compliments come naturally 
to people when they want something from somebody. In fact, 
compliments are the most widely used and thoroughly endorsed 
of all getting-what-you-want techniques. When Dale Carnegie 
wrote “Begin with praise,” fifteen million readers took it to heart. 
Most of us still think praise is the path to extracting what we want 
from someone. 

And yes, if it’s as simple as dolls from daddy and munchies 
from mommy, it may be. But the business world has changed 

199 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



200 How to Talk to Anyone 


dramatically since Dale Carnegie’s day. In today’s world, not every 
smiling flatterer has the power to procure through praise. 


The Malaise of Unskilled Praise 

You give someone a compliment. You smile, waiting to see the 
warm feelings engulf the recipient. You may have to wait a long 
time. 

If he or she has a speck of suspicion your praise is self-serving, 
it has the opposite effect. If your compliment is insincere or 
unskilled, it can wreck your chances of ever being trusted by that 
person again. It can abort a potential relationship before it ever gets 
off the runway. 

However, skilled praise is a different story. When done well, 
it gives the relationship immediate liftoff. It can make a sale, win 
a new friend, or rejuvenate a marriage on a golden anniversary. 

What is the difference between praise that lifts and flattery 
that flattens? Many factors enter the equation. They include your 
sincerity, timing, motivation, and wording. They also involve the 
recipient’s self-image, professional position, experience with com¬ 
pliments, and judgment of your powers of perception. Of course 
it entails the relationship between the two of you and how long 
you have known each other. If you’re complimenting someone 
by phone, E-mail, or snail mail, it even involves subtleties such 
as whether you’ve ever seen his or face, either in person or a 
photograph. 

Mind boggling, isn’t it? Sociologists’ research shows: 1) a com¬ 
pliment from a new person is more potent than from someone you 
already know, 2) your compliment has more credibility when given 
to an unattractive person or an attractive person whose face you’ve 
never seen, 3) you are taken more seriously if you preface your 
comments by some self-effacing remark—but only if your listener 
perceives you as higher on the totem pole. If you’re lower, your 



How to Differentiate the Power of Praise from the Folly of Flattery 201 


self-effacing remark reduces your credibility. Complicated, this 
complimenting stuff. 

Rather than dizzying ourselves with the surfeit of specific 
studies, let’s just put some terrific techniques in our little bag of 
tricks. Each of the following meets all the criteria of social scien¬ 
tists’ findings. Here are nine effective ways to praise in the new 
millennium. 



si How to Compliment 
Someone (Without 
Sounding Like You’re 
Brownnosing) 

The risk in giving a compliment face-to-face is, of course, that the 
distrustful recipient will assume you are indulging in shameless, 
obsequious pandering to achieve your own greedy goals. 

It’s a sad reality about compliments. If you lay a big one out 
of the blue on your boss, your prospect, or your sweetie, the recip¬ 
ient will probably think you’re brownnosing. Your main squeeze 
will assume you’re suffering guilt over something you’ve done. So 
what’s the solution? Hold back your sincere esteem? 

No, simply deliver it through the grapevine. The grapevine 
has long been a trusted means of communication. From the days 
when Catskills comics insisted the best ways to spread news were 
“telephone, telegraph, and tell-a-woman,” we have known it works. 
Unfortunately the grapevine is most often associated with bad 
news, the kind that goes in one ear and over the back fence. But 
the grapevine need not be laden only with scuttlebutt and sour 
grapes. Good news can travel through the same filament. And 
when it arrives in the recipient’s ear, it is all the more delectable. 
This is not a new discovery. Back in 1732, Thomas Fuller wrote, 
“He’s my friend that speaks well of me behind my back.” We’re 

202 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Compliment Someone (Without Sounding Like You’re Brownnosing) 203 


more apt to trust someone who says nice things about us when we 
aren’t listening than someone who flatters us to our face. 


No-Risk Praise (Do It Behind Their Back) 

Instead of telling someone directly of your admiration, tell some¬ 
one who is close to the person you wish to compliment. For 
instance, suppose you want to be in the good graces of Jane Smith. 
Don’t directly compliment Jane. Go to her close associate Diane 
Doe and say, “You know, Jane is a very dynamic woman. She said 
something so brilliant in the meeting the other day. Someday she’ll 
be running this company.” I place ten-to-one odds your comment 
will get back to Jane via the grapevine in twenty-four hours. Diane 
will tell her friend, “You should hear what so ’n’ so said about you 
the other day.” 


4 * 


ECHNIQUE #51 

Grapevine Glory 


A compliment one hears is never as exciting as the one 
he overhears. A priceless way to praise is not by 
telephone, not by telegraph, but by tell-a-friend. This 
way you escape possible suspicion that you are an 
apple-polishing, bootlicking, egg-sucking, back- 
scratching sycophant trying to win brownie points. You 
also leave recipients with the happy fantasy that you are 
telling the whole world about their greatness. 


When you gave Grapevine Glory to Jane, Diane became the 
carrier pigeon of that compliment. Which leads us to the next 
technique where you become the carrier pigeon of other people’s 
compliments. 



How to Bea 
“Carrier Pigeon” of 
Good Feelings 


Carrier pigeons have a long and valiant history. The dauntless 
winged messengers, often maimed by shellfire and dying after 
delivering their messages, have saved the lives of thousands. One 
tenacious little bird named Cher Ami is credited with saving two 
hundred lives during the Battle of the Argonne in World War I. 
The brave one-legged little birdie, one of his wings shot through, 
carried a message dangling from his remaining ligament. The 
blood-smeared little ball of feathers arrived just in time to warn 
that the Germans were about to bomb the city. 

Stumpy Joe, another plucky pigeon, had such a heroic battle- 
scarred career that his fans stuffed him, mounted him, and put 
him on display in the National Air Force Museum in Dayton, 
Ohio. And millions of other brave birds have brought joyful mes¬ 
sages to racing-pigeon enthusiasts around the world. In that fine 
tradition, I present the complimenting technique I call “Carrier 
Pigeon Kudos.” 

Whenever you hear a laudatory comment about someone, 
don’t let it end there. You don’t need to write it, roll it up in a cap¬ 
sule, strap it to your leg like Stumpy Joe, and fly it to the recipi¬ 
ent. Nevertheless, you can remember the kudo and verbally carry 
it to the person who will get the most pleasure—the person who 
was complimented. 


204 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Be a “Carrier Pigeon” of Good Feelings 205 


Keep your ears open for good things people say about each 
other. If your colleague Carl says something nice about another 
colleague, Sam, pass it on. “You know, Sam, Carl said the nicest 
thing about you the other day.” 

Your sister tells you your first cousin is a dynamite relative. Go 
ahead and call Cuz’. 

Your mother tells you she thinks Manny did a great job mow¬ 
ing the lawn. Pass it on to him. Hey, we all like a little apprecia¬ 
tion, even from Mom. 

Here’s where it benefits you. Everyone loves the bearer of glad 
tidings. When you bring someone third-party kudos, they appre¬ 
ciate you as much as the complimenter. Call it gossip if you like. 
This is the good kind. 


1 % 


ECHNIQUE #52 

Carrier Pigeon Kudos 


People immediately grow a beak and metamorphosize 
themselves into carrier pigeons when there’s bad news. 
(It’s called gossip.) Instead, become a carrier of good 
news and kudos. Whenever you hear something 
complimentary about someone, fly to them with the 
compliment. Your fans may not posthumously stuff 
you and put you on display in a museum like Stumpy 
Joe. But everyone loves the carrier pigeon of kind 
thoughts. 


Carry More Cargo than Compliments 

Another way to warm hearts and win friends is to become a car¬ 
rier pigeon of news items that might interest the recipient. Call, 
mail, or E-mail people with information they might find interest- 



206 How to Talk to Anyone 


ing. If your friend Ned is a furniture designer in North Carolina 
and you see a big article in the Los Angeles Times about furniture 
trends, fax it to him. If your client Sally is a sculptor in Seattle and 
you see her work in someone’s home in New York, send her a note. 

My friend Dan lives in San Francisco, and whenever he runs 
across anything in the paper on communications, he clips it and 
sends it to me. No note, just “FYI—Regards, Dan” in the corner. 
He’s like my own private West Coast clipping service. 

Try it. Think of the money you’ll save on greeting cards. A 
relevant clipping is the big winner’s way of saying, “I’m thinking 
of you and your interests.” 



55 How to Make’Em Feel 
Your Admiration “Just 
Slipped Out” 


Here’s yet another caress for someone’s ego. Don’t give a blatant 
compliment. Merely imply something magnificent about your con¬ 
versation partner. Several months ago, I was visiting an old friend 
in Denver whom I hadn’t seen in a long time. When he came to 
my hotel to pick me up, he said, “Hello, Leil, how are you?” Then 
he paused, looked at me, and said, “You’ve obviously been well.” 
Wow, I felt terrific. He implied I looked good and that made my 
evening. 

Guess the Good Lord decided I shouldn’t have too swollen a 
head, however, because later that evening, after my friend dropped 
me off, I got into the hotel elevator. A maintenance man entered 
at the third floor. He smiled at me. I smiled back. He looked at 
me again and said, “Gosh, ma’am, was you a model? [Oh, man, 
was I feeling on top of the world now!] . . . when you was young?” 
he continued. 

CRASH! Why couldn’t he have zipped his lip before the 
zinger? I loved the implication in the first part of his comment. 
But the second implied I was now an old lady. Ruined my next 
day. Heck, his unintentional low blow ruined my week. In fact I 
still feel wretched about it. 


207 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



208 How to Talk to Anyone 


You have to be careful of unintentional bad implications. If, 
visiting a new city, you stop someone on the street and say, “Excuse 
me, could you tell me if there are any fine dining restaurants 
nearby?” you are implying the passerby is a person of taste. If, 
however, you ask that same passerby, “Hey, know any down and 
dirty bars in this burg?” your implication is entirely different. Find 
a way to imply magnificent qualities of those you wish to indi¬ 
rectly compliment. 




ECHNIQUE #53 

Implied Magnificence 


Throw a few comments into your conversation that 
presuppose something positive about the person you’re 
talking with. But be careful. Don’t blow it like the well- 
intentioned maintenance man. Or the southern boy 
who, at the prom, thought he was flattering his date 
when he told her, “Gosh, Mary Lou, for a fat gal you 
dance real good.” 



54 How to Win Their 
Hearts by Being an 
“Undercover 
Complimenter” 


Next in our agglomeration of joy spreaders is a technique I call 
“Accidental Adulation.” Once, at a small dinner party, the subject 
turned to space travel. The gentleman seated to my right said, 
“Led, you’re much too young to remember this, but when Apollo 
n landed on the moon ...” 

If my life depended on it, I couldn’t tell you what the chap 
said next. I simply remember smiling to myself and stretching to 
get a glimpse of my youthful self in the dining-room mirror. Of 
course I remember July 1969. Like the rest of the world, I was 
glued to the television watching Neil Armstrong’s size 9 Vi B boot 
hit the moon. However, I certainly was not thinking of moon 
travel at that dinner party. I was too busy reveling in the fact that 
this lovely man didn’t think I was old enough to remember 1969. 
I assumed his opinion of my youthfulness just slipped out. There¬ 
fore it must be sincere. 

Sure! Now that I think about it, he probably knew darn well 
I was old enough to remember the moon landing. I bet he was 


209 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



2io How to Talk to Anyone 


using the maneuver Accidental Adulation. But it doesn’t matter. 
My warm memories of him remain. Accidental Adulation is slip¬ 
ping praise into the secondary part of your point, putting it in ver¬ 
bal parentheses. 


Try It. You’ll Like It. They’ll Love It. 

Try Accidental Adulation and see smiles break out on the faces of 
the recipients. Tell your sixty-five-year-old uncle, “Anyone as fit 
as you would have zipped right up those steps, but boy, was I out 
of breath.” Tell a colleague: “Because you’re so knowledgeable in 
contract law, you would have read between the lines, but stupidly, 
I signed it.” 

You run the danger, of course, that you will please the recip¬ 
ient so profoundly with your parenthetical praise, he or she won’t 
hear your main point. 


Zb 


ECHNIQUE #54 

Accidental Adulation 


Become an undercover complimenter. Stealthily sneak 
praise into the parenthetical part of your sentence. 

Just don’t try to quiz anyone later on your main 
point. The joyful jolt of your accidental adulation 
strikes them temporarily deaf to anything that follows. 


So far we have explored four covert compliments: Grapevine 
Glory, Carrier Pigeon Kudos, Implied Magnificence, and Acci¬ 
dental Adulation. There are times, of course, when blatant praise 
does work. The next techniques will hone your skills in this pre¬ 
carious but rewarding venture. 



55 How to Make’Em Never 
Forget You with a 
“killer Compliment” 


Would you like to have a little trick up your sleeve potent enough 
to kick start commerce, ignite a friendship or even a love affair? 
I’ll give you one, but only if you heed its warning label. You must 
register your tongue as a lethal weapon once you’ve mastered the 
following technique. It’s called the “Killer Compliment.” 

It was born one night some years ago after my then-roommate, 
Christine, and I had just returned home from a holiday party. As 
we were taking off our coats, she had a silly smile on her face and 
a faraway look in her eye. 

“Christine, are you OK?” I asked. 

“Oh yes,” she purred. “I’m going to go out with that man.” 

“Man? What man?” 

“Oh, you know,” she said, chastising me for not knowing, “the 
one who told me I had beautiful teeth.” 

Teeth! 

That night I happened to walk by the bathroom door as 
Christine was getting ready for bed. I saw her grinning at herself 
in the mirror, tilting her head from side to side, and brushing each 
individual tooth. All the while she kept her eyes glued to the mir¬ 
ror, inspecting each one for the beauty her new admirer com¬ 
mented on. I realized the fellow who had given Christine the 

211 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



2i2 How to Talk to Anyone 


unusual compliment had made her day—and had made a killer 
impression on her. Thus the Killer Compliment came into being. 

What is the Killer Compliment? It is commenting on some 
very personal and specific quality you spot in someone. A Killer 
Compliment is not “I like your tie” or “You’re a very nice person.” 
(The first is not personal enough and the second is not specific 
enough.) A Killer Compliment is more like “What exquisite eyes 
you have,” (very specific) or “You have a wonderful air of honesty 
about you,” (very personal). 

Because delivering your first Killer Compliment is difficult, I 
trick my seminar participants into pulling it off. About midway 
through the program, I’ll ask them to close their eyes and think 
about a partner they had in an earlier exercise. Then I say, “Now 
recall one attractive physical quality or personality trait you 
observed in your partner. Not one you would necessarily comment 
on,” I caution. “Perhaps your partner had a lovely smile or a twin¬ 
kle in her eye. Perhaps he exuded a sense of calm or credibility. 
Got it in your mind?” 

Then the thunderbolt: “OK, now go find your partner and 
tell them the nice quality you noticed.” “What? Tell them?” The 
thought paralyzes them. One by one, however, they courageously 
seek their partners and deliver their Killer Compliments. As peo¬ 
ple hear a stranger tell them they have beautiful hands or pene¬ 
trating brown eyes, joy fills the room. Laughter explodes in every 
corner. I am now looking out at a sea of smiles and happy blushes. 
Everyone loves receiving his or her personal Killer Compliment. 
And everyone develops friendly feelings toward the giver. 

The Killer Compliment User’s Manual 

Just like a cannon, if you don’t use the Killer Compliment cor¬ 
rectly, it can backfire. Here’s the user’s manual that comes with 
the mighty missile. 



How to Make ’Em Never Forget You with a “Killer Compliment” 213 


&amp; 


ECHNIQUE #55 

Killer Compliment 


Whenever you are talking with a stranger you’d like to 
make part of your professional or personal future, search 
for one attractive, specific, and unique quality he or she 
has. 

At the end of the conversation, look the individual 
right in the eye. Say his or her name and proceed to 
curl all ten toes with the Killer Compliment. 


Rule #1: Deliver your Killer Compliment to the recipi¬ 
ent in private. If you are standing with a group of four or five 
people and you praise one woman for being fit, every other woman 
feels like a barrel of lard. If you tell one man he has wonderful 
carriage, every other feels like a hunchback. You also make the 
blushing recipient uncomfortable. 

Rule #2: Make your Killer Compliment credible. For 
example, I’m tone-deaf. If I’m forced to sing even a simple song 
like “Happy Birthday,” I sound like a sick pig. If anyone in earshot 
were foolish enough to tell me they liked my voice, I’d know it 
was hogwash. 

Rule #3: Confer only one Killer Compliment per half 
year on each recipient. Otherwise you come across as insincere, 
groveling, obsequious, pandering, and a thoroughly manipulative 
person. Not cool. 

With careful aim, the Killer Compliment captures everyone. 
It works best, however, when you use it judiciously on new 
acquaintances. If you want to praise friends every day, employ the 
next technique. 



st How to Make ’Em Smile 
with “Itty-Bitty 
Boosters” 

In contrast to the big guns of Killer Compliments for strangers, 
and The Tombstone Game for loved ones, which we will learn 
shortly, here’s a little peashooter you can pop off at anyone, any¬ 
time. I call it “Little Strokes.” 

Little Strokes are short, quick kudos you drop into your casual 
conversation. Make liberal use of Little Strokes with your col¬ 
leagues in the office: 

“Nice job, John!” 

“Well done, Kyoto!” 

“Hey, not bad, Billy!” 

I have one friend who uses a lovely Little Stroke. If I do some¬ 
thing he likes, he says, “Not too shabby, Leil.” 

You can also use Little Strokes on the everyday achievements 
of your loved ones. If your spouse just cooked a great meal, “Wow, 
you’re the best chef in town.” Just before going out together, “Gee, 
honey, you look great.” After a long drive, “You did it! It must have 
been tiring.” With your kids, “Hey, gang, great job cleaning up 
your room.” 

I once read a poignant Readers Digest article about a little girl 
who often misbehaved. Her mother had to continually reprimand 
her. However, one day, the little girl had been especially good and 


214 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Make ’Em Smile with “Itty-Bitty Boosters” 215 


hadn’t done a single thing that called for a reprimand. The mother 
said, “That night after I tucked her in bed and started downstairs, 
I heard a muffled noise. Running back up, I found her head buried 
in the pillow. She was sobbing. Between the sobs she asked, 
‘Mommy, haven’t I been a pretty good girl today?’ ” 

The question, the mother said, went through her like a knife. 
“I had been quick to correct her,” she said, “when she was wrong. 
But when she tried to behave, I hadn’t noticed it and I put her to 
bed without one word of appreciation.” 

Adults are all grown-up little girls and little boys. We may not 
go to bed sobbing if the people in our lives don’t notice when we 
are good. Nevertheless, a trace of those tears lingers. 




ECHNIQUE #56 

Little Strokes 


Don’t make your colleagues, your friends, your loved 
ones look at you and silently say, “Haven’t I been pretty 
good today?” Let them know how much you appreciate 
them by caressing them with verbal Little Strokes like 
“Nice job!” “Well done!” “Cool!” 


Little Things Mean a Lot 

Little Strokes are indeed, little. But as every woman knows, they 
mean a lot. I’ve yet to meet a woman who wouldn’t agree with 
these lyrics from an old song sung by Kitty Kallen: 

Blow me a kiss from across the room. 

Say I look nice when I’m not. 

Touch my hair as you pass my chair. 



216 How to Talk to Anyone 


Little things mean a lot. 

Send me the warmth of a secret smile 
To show me you haven’t forgot. 

For always and ever, now and forever, 

Little things mean a lot. 

To further complicate the art of the compliment, one must 
consider timing. Blatant, barefaced, brazen flattery turns all but 
the blindest egomaniacs off. But the human animal never fails to 
amaze observers. There are moments when, if you don’t give a bla¬ 
tant, barefaced, brazen compliment—even to a bright individ¬ 
ual—you lose. The following technique defines those moments. 




How to Praise with 
Perfect Timing 


I’ll never forget the first time I gave a luncheon speech in front of 
strangers. I’d practiced for the stuffed animals on my bed and my 
roommate, Christine, but this was my debut in front of a real 
audience. 

As I shakily got to my feet, I looked out at seventeen smiling 
Rotarians waiting for my words of wit and wisdom. My tongue 
was dry as chalk dust, my palms as wet as a fish. The audience 
might as well have been seventeen thousand judges waiting to sen¬ 
tence me to eternal humiliation if I didn’t inform and entertain 
each. I gave a last panic-stricken glance at Christine, who had 
driven me to the club, and began, “Good afternoon. It gives me 
great pleasure ...” 

Thirty minutes later, amidst scattered applause which I feared 
was obligatory, I crawled back to my seat next to Christine. I 
looked expectantly at her. She smiled and said, “You know this 
dessert isn’t bad. Have some.” 

Dessert? “Dessert! Dammit, Christine, how did I do?” I 
silently screamed at her. A few minutes later Christine told me how 
much she and, she assumed, everyone else enjoyed my talk. Nev¬ 
ertheless, by then it was too late. The crucial compliment-craving 
moment had passed. 


2IJ 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



218 How to Talk to Anyone 


Quick as a Hiccup, You Must 
Compliment NOW 

When the doctor sadistically smacks your knee with that nasty lit¬ 
tle rubber hammer, you instantly give a knee jerk. And when peo¬ 
ple make a coup, you must instantly hit them with a knee-jerk 
“Wow, you were great!” 

Say they’ve just successfully negotiated a deal, cooked a ter¬ 
rific Thanksgiving turkey, or sung a solo song at the birthday party. 
No matter whether their accomplishment is trivial or triumphant, 
you must praise it immediately—not ten minutes later, not two 
minutes later—immediately. The moment the winner walks out 
of the boardroom, the kitchen, the spotlight, the victor wants to 
hear only one sound: “WOW!” 


Zh 


ECHNIQUE #57 

The Knee-Jerk “Wow!” 


Quick as a blink, you must praise people the moment 
they a finish a feat. In a wink, like a knee-jerk reaction 
say, “You were terrific!” 

Don’t worry that they won’t believe you. The 
euphoria of the moment has a strangely numbing effect 
on the achiever’s objective judgment. 


But What If They Really Bombed? 

“Are you asking me to lie?” you ask. Yes. Absolutely, positively, 
resoundingly, YES. This is one of the few moments in life where 
a lie is condoned by the most ethical individuals. Big winners real¬ 
ize that sensitivity to an insecure performer’s ego takes momen¬ 
tary precedence over their deep commitment to the truth. They 



How to Praise with Perfect Timing 219 


also know, when sanity returns to the recipient and they suspect 
they screwed up, it won’t matter. He or she will retroactively appre¬ 
ciate your sensitivity and forgive your compassionate falsehood. 

We’ve talked a lot about giving compliments, both covert and 
overt. Now let’s talk about a skill that, for many, is even harder— 
receiving them. 




How to Make ’Em Want 
to Compliment You 


We have a national weakness: we don’t know how to receive a 
compliment! In fact, I would like to dedicate the following tech¬ 
nique to my French friends who contend the French are better at 
everything. Well, I concede one point. The French are, indeed, 
better at receiving compliments. I’ll explain how shortly. 

Americans, unfortunately, are beastly at accepting adulation. 
If someone compliments you and you react clumsily out of embar¬ 
rassment, you unwittingly start a vicious cycle. A friend ventures 
a compliment: 

Fie: (smiling) “Fiey, that’s a nice dress you’re wearing.” 

She: (frowning) “Oh, this old thing?” 

Fie: (thinking) “Whoops, she didn’t seem to like hearing that. 
She thinks I have terrible taste to like that dress. I’d better keep 
my mouth shut.” 

Three weeks later . . . 

She: (thinking grumpily) “Fie doesn’t ever give me compli¬ 
ments anymore. What a boor!” 

Fie: (thinking gloomily) “What’s her problem?” 


220 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Make Em Want to Compliment You 


221 


“Girls Don’t Like What?” 

Several months ago in one of my seminars, the group was dis¬ 
cussing compliments. One fellow insisted that “girls don’t like 
compliments.” 

“Girls don’t like what?” I asked incredulously. 

He explained, “I once told a woman she had beautiful eyes. 
And she said, ‘Boy, are you blind.’” The poor chap was so 
wounded by her reaction, he became gun-shy and had not aimed 
a compliment at a female since. What a shame for womankind and 
what a blight on his social skills. 

Upon receiving a compliment, many people demur or proffer 
an embarrassed little “Thank you.” Worse, they protest, “Well, not 
really, but thanks anyway.” Some people toss it off with, “just luck.” 
When you react this way, you visit a grave injustice on the com- 
plimenter. You insult a well-meaning person’s powers of perception. 


“Vous Etes Gentil” 

Leave it to French folks to come up with a congenial catchall 
phrase. Upon receiving a compliment, they say, “Vous etes gentil.’' 
Loosely translated, that is “How kind of you.” 

An American saying “How kind of you” could sound stilted— 
like the little flower girl in My Fair Lady trying to be cultured. 
Nevertheless, we Yanks can express the French gentil sentiment 
with a technique I call “Boomeranging.” 

When you toss a boomerang, it makes an almost 180-degree 
swerve in midair and soars back to land at the feet of the thrower. 
Likewise, when someone tosses a compliment your way, let the good 
feelings soar back to the tosser. Don’t just say “Thanks.” (Or worse, 
“Oh it’s nothing.”) Let them know of your gratitude and find a way 
to compliment them for their compliment. A few examples: 



222 How to Talk to Anyone 


She says, “I like those shoes.” You say, “Oh I’m so happy you 
told me. I just got them.” 

He says, “You really did a good job on this project.” You say, 
“Oh, that’s so nice of you to tell me. I appreciate your positive 
feedback.” 

You can also Boomerang the good feelings back when people 
ask you a question about your family, a project, an event, or any¬ 
thing that shows they are interested in you. 

Your colleague asks, “How was your vacation in Hawaii?” You 
answer, “Oh, you remembered I went to Hawaii! It was great, 
thanks.” 

Your boss asks, “Are you over your cold now?” You answer, “I 
appreciate your concern. I feel much better now.” 

Whenever someone shines a little sunshine on your life in the 
form of a compliment or concerned question, reflect it back on 
the shiner. 

rY 

Technique #58 

Boomeranging 

Just as a boomerang flies right back to the thrower, let 

compliments boomerang right back to the giver. Like 

the French, quickly murmur something that expresses 

“That’s very kind of you.” 


Incidently, in that seminar, I decided to do womankind a favor 
by setting malekind straight on compliments once and for all. I 
asked the fellow who swore women hated praise to give three 
women sitting near him a sincere compliment. He chose the 
woman with “the beautiful silver hair sitting behind him,” the girl 



How to Make ’Em Want to ComplimentXow 223 


with the “hands like a pianist” to his left, and the lady with “the 
lovely deep-blue eyes” on his right. He told them all. 

Three women waltzed out of the room that night feeling a lit¬ 
tle better about themselves than when they walked in. And, I 
hope, for all the women he would yet meet in his life, one man 
left with a changed attitude about compliments. 

As we come to the end of our exploration of praise, I want to 
make sure you’re aiming dead center for peoples hearts. Whether 
you’re giving little Carrier Pigeon Kudos or laying a Killer Com¬ 
pliment on your conversation partner, this next technique keeps 
you on target. 



sp How to Make a Loved 
One Feel You Are THE 
Partner for Life 


Do you remember when you were a kid the hundreds of times 
Mommy’s and Daddy’s friends asked, “And what do you want to 
be when you grow up?” That was our cue to regale our adoring 
audience with dreams of being a ballerina, a firefighter, a nurse, a 
cowboy, or a movie star. Well, most of our lives wound up being 
a little closer to butcher, baker, or candlestick maker. Neverthe¬ 
less, we all still have fantasies of our own greatness. 

Even though most of us cashed in our childhood dreams of 
being the star we thought we’d be (so we could make some 
money), we all know that deep down we are very, very, very spe¬ 
cial. We say to ourselves, “Maybe the world will little note nor long 
remember how brilliant, how wonderful, how witty, how creative 
or caring I really am. However, those who truly know and love 
me—they will recognize my greatness, my magic, my specialness 
over all other ordinary mortals.” When we find people with the 
supernatural powers of perception to recognize our remarkable¬ 
ness, we become addicted to the heady drug of their appreciation. 

Praising someone you know and love requires a different set 
of skills from complimenting a stranger. The formula to bring 
someone even closer to you personally or professionally follows. I 
call it “The Tombstone Game.” It requires a little setup. 


224 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Make a Loved One Feel You Are THE Partner for Life 225 


Step one: In a quiet moment chatting with your friend, your 
loved one, or your business partner, tell him or her that the other 
day you were reading about—of all things—tombstones! “The 
piece was about,” you say, “what people fantasize will be inscribed 
above their grave after they die.” You learned that people want the 
quality they are most proud of in life etched in stone. Then say, 
“The variety is surprising. Everyone has a different self-image, a 
different deep source of pride.” Examples: 

Here lies John Doe. He was a brilliant scientist. 

Here lies Diane Smith. She was a caring woman. 

Here lies Billy Bucks. By golly, he could make people laugh. 

Here lies Jane Wilson. She spread joy wherever she went. 

Here lies Harry Jones. He lived life his way. 

Step two: Reveal to your partner what you would like carved 
on your tombstone. Be serious about your revelation to encourage 
him or her to do likewise. 

Step three: Now, you pop the question, “You know, Joe, when 
all is said and done, what are you most proud of? What would you 
like the world to most remember about you? What would you 
want the world to see carved on your tombstone?” 

Perhaps your business partner Joe says, “Well, I guess I’d sort 
of like people to know that I’m a man of my word.” Listen care¬ 
fully. If he expounds on it, take note of every nuance. Then file it 
away in your heart and don’t say a word about it again. Joe will 
forget you ever played The Tombstone Game with him. 

Step four: Let at least three weeks pass. Then, whenever you 
want to improve the relationship, feed the information back to 
your partner in the form of a compliment. Say “Joe, you know the 
reason I really appreciate being in business with you is because 
you’re a man of your word.” 

WOW, that hits Joe like a 747 out of the sky. “Finally,” he 
says to himself, “someone who appreciates me for who I really 
am.” Telling him you admire him for the same reason he admires 



226 How to Talk to Anyone 


himself has an impact on Joe like no other compliment in the 
world. 

Now, suppose your friend is Billy Bucks, the one who wanted 
his wit carved on his tombstone. You’d say, “Billy, of buddy, you’re 
terrific. I loves ya ’cause you can really make people laugh.” 

“I Love You Because ...” (You Fill 
in the Blank) 

Suppose your significant other is Jane Wilson in the preceding 
example. Tell your beloved, “Jane, I love you because you spread 
joy wherever you go.” 

Suppose your life partner is Harry Jones. You take his hand 
and say, “Harry, I love you because you live life your way.” BLAM! 
You have found that tender spot where the heart and the ego 
blend. 




ECHNIQUE #59 

The Tombstone Game 


Ask the important people in your life what they would 
like engraved on their tombstone. Chisel it into your 
memory but don’t mention it again. Then, when the 
moment is right to say “I appreciate you” or “I love 
you,” fill the blanks with the very words they gave you 
weeks earlier. 

You take people’s breath away when you feed their 
deepest self-image to them in a compliment. “At last,” 
they say to themselves, “someone who loves me for who 
I truly am.” 



How to Make a Loved One Feel Yon Are THE Partner for Life 227 


The Tombstone Game compliments are not interchangeable. 
Billy Bucks might not appreciate your calling him a man of his 
word; Billy’s thing is humor. Jane might not value your thinking 
she lives life her way. Her source of pride is spreading joy wher¬ 
ever she goes. 

It’s wonderful to tell people you appreciate or love them. 
When it matches what they appreciate or love about themselves, 
the effect is overpowering. 



This page intentionally left blank. 



PART SEVEN 

How to Direct Dial 
Their Hearts 

Hundreds of people have formed impressions of you through that 
little device on your desk, your bed table, your kitchen wall. And 
they’ve never actually met you. They’ve never seen your smiles, 
felt your frowns. They’ve never grasped your hand or enjoyed your 
hugs. They’ve never read your body language or seen how you 
dress. Everything they know about you came through tiny fila¬ 
ments, sometimes from hundreds of miles away. But they feel they 
know you just from the sound of your voice. That’s how power¬ 
ful the telephone is. 

Powerful, yes, but not always accurate. For years I dealt with 
my travel agent only by phone. Rani, my faceless agent whom I’d 
never met in person, got me rock-bottom prices on airfares, cars, 
and hotels. But her snippy phone personality really ticked me off. 
A dozen times I vowed to find another agent. 

One Monday morning several years ago, I received bad news 
and had to book an immediate flight home for a family emergency. 
I had no time to wait in line at the airport, so I jumped in a cab 
and asked the driver to wait in front of the travel agency while I 
grabbed tickets and a boarding pass. 

Like a lit fuse, I zipped into Rani’s agency for the first time. 
Seeing my frenzied rush, the woman sitting at the front desk sym¬ 
pathetically jumped up. She gave me a reassuring smile and asked 


229 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



230 How to Talk to Anyone 


how she could help me. As I blithered on about my need for an 
emergency ticket, she smiled, nodded, and lunged immediately 
into action. “What a terrific lady!” I thought as she printed out 
the tickets. 

Moments later, darting out gratefully grasping the tickets in 
my fist, I called out over my shoulder, “By the way, what’s your 
name?” 

“Leil, I’m Rani,” she said. I whirled around and saw a thor¬ 
oughly congenial woman with a big smile on her face waving to 
wish me a safe trip. I was dumbfounded! Why had I previously 
thought she was so snippy? Rani was, well, so nice. 

Sitting back in the cab on the way to the airport, I figured it 
all out. Ranis friendliness—her warm smile, her nods, her good 
eye contact, her body language, her “I’m here for you” attitude— 
were all silent signals that didn’t travel through wires. I closed my 
eyes and tried to remember the voice I had heard moments ago. 
Yes, it was Rani’s same crisp, curt pronunciation. But her friendly 
body language made her seem like a different person from the 
brusque agent I’d dealt with on the phone. Rani’s phone person¬ 
ality and her demeanor in person were completely different shows. 

I realized it’s the same with all of us. Your personality, mine, 
and everyone’s could be likened to a show, a theatrical perfor¬ 
mance. You want to make sure yours is a box-office smash, not a 
flop. The following ten techniques will get your phone personal¬ 
ity rave reviews. 




How to Sound More 
Exciting on the Phone 


I have a friend, Tina, who designed costumes for an off-off- 
Broadway show that became a smash hit a few years ago. The tiny 
show was such a critical success, it won the heart of an angel— 
a backer—and it went to Broadway. There the show laid a big 
fat egg. 

When I read the bad news, I called Tina. “Tina, why did the 
show get such bad reviews on Broadway?” Tina told me that, sadly, 
the director didn’t insist the actors and actresses change their per¬ 
formances to adapt to the new surroundings. The actors’ under¬ 
stated movements, which moved small audiences alternately to 
laughter and tears, were lost in the big Broadway house. Audiences 
couldn’t see their subtle gestures and poignant facial expressions. 
Tina told me the performers neglected to make their movements 
much bigger to fit the new medium. 

That excellent advice is not just for actors. Whenever you are 
talking, you must consider your medium. If your face were on a 
big movie screen, you might get your message across with a wink 
or an eyebrow raise. On radio, however, that would be meaning¬ 
less. Because listeners couldn’t see your wink, you’d have to say 
something like “Hi, Cutie.” Because listeners couldn’t see your 
raised eyebrows, you’d have to say, “Wow, I’m surprised!” 

25 j 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



232 How to Talk to Anyone 


Your body language and facial expressions comprise more than 
half your personality. When people don’t see you, they can get an 
entirely wrong impression as I did with Rani. To get your person¬ 
ality across on the phone, you must translate your emotions into 
sound. In fact, you have to exaggerate the sound because studies 
have shown people lose 30 percent of the energy level in their 
voices on the phone. 

Say you meet an important new contact tomorrow. When 
you’re introduced, you shake her hand, you fully face her. You 
make good, strong eye contact and let a sincere smile flood over 
your face. You even nod and smile, listening intently as she speaks. 
She likes you a lot. 

But how good an impression could you make on that VIP if 
both you and she were blindfolded and the two of you had your 
hands tied behind your backs? That’s the handicap you suffer on 
the phone. 

If she couldn’t see you, you’d have to substitute words to let 
her know you’re agreeing or listening. You’d have to somehow ver¬ 
balize that you’re smiling and use her name more to replace the eye 
contact. You’d be using the technique I call “Talking Gestures.” 

To make up for your missing eye contact, punctuate your 
phone conversations with “Uh huh” or “I hear you.” So your lis¬ 
tener knows you’re nodding in approval, verbalize “I see,” “Oh 
that’s great,” “No kidding,” “Interesting,” and “Tell me more!” 

She didn’t see you hitting your head in surprise? Better say 
“What a surprise!” or “You don’t say!” 

He just said something impressive and he can’t see your look 
of admiration? Try “That was wise of you” or “You’re no dummy!” 

Of course, you need a big verbal smile in your repertoire. Try 
“Oh, wow, that’s funny!” Obviously you’re going to choose phrases 
that match your personality and the situation. Just make sure your 
phone listeners hear your emotions. 



How to Sound More Exciting on the Phone 233 




ECHNIQUE #60 

Talking Gestures 


Think of yourself as the star of a personal radio drama 
every time you pick up the phone. If you want to come 
across as engaging as you are, you must turn your 
smiles into sound, your nods into noise, and all your 
gestures into something your listener can hear. You 
must replace your gestures with talk. Then punch up 
the whole act 30 percent! 




How to Sound Close 
(Even if You’re Hundreds 
of Miles Away) 


When you’re not sitting across from each other resting your elbows 
on the same desk, your forks on the same table, or your heads on 
the same pillow, you need a substitute for intimacy. How can you 
create closeness when the two of you are hundreds of miles apart? 
How can you make the person you’re talking to on the phone feel 
special when you can’t pat their back or give them a little hug? 

The answer is simple. Just use your caller’s name far more 
often than you would in person. In fact, shower your conversa¬ 
tions with his or her name. When your listener hears it, it’s like 
receiving a verbal caress: 

“Thanks, Sam.” 

“Let’s do it, Betty.” 

“Hey, Demetri, why not?” 

“It’s really been good talking to you, Kathi.” 

Saying a person’s name too often in face-to-face conversation 
sounds manipulative. However, on the phone the effect is dra¬ 
matically different. If you heard someone say your name, even if 
you were being jostled around in a big noisy crowd, you’d perk up 


234 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Sound Close (Even if You’re Hundreds of Miles Away) 


and listen. Likewise, when your phone partner hears his or her own 
name coming through the receiver, it commands attention and re¬ 
creates the familiarity the phone robs from you. 

If your listener is drifting, it brings him right back. If she’s 
opening mail, she stops. If he’s picking his teeth, he pulls the pick 
out. When you say someone’s name on the phone, it’s like yank¬ 
ing the person into the room with you. 


Zb 


ECHNIQUE 


#61 


Name Shower 


People perk up when they hear their own name. Use it 
more often on the phone than you would in person to 
keep their attention. Your caller’s name re-creates the 
eye contact, the caress, you might give in person. 

Saying someone’s name repeatedly when face-to-face 
sounds pandering. But because there is physical distance 
between you on the phone—sometimes you’re a conti¬ 
nent apart—you can spray your conversation with it. 



4 How to Make’Em 
Happy They [ailed You 


Brr-ing! No matter whether you hear the ring in the boardroom, 
the bedroom, or the bathroom, self-styled telephone experts tell 
you, “Smile before answering.” Some pros even suggest you perch 
a mirror right next to your phone to monitor your grin. 

Been there, done that, doesn’t work. One evening, in the mid¬ 
dle of my weekly mud-pack facial, the phone rang. The horror of 
seeing myself in the phone mirror made my voice as hideous as 
my face. I immediately trashed the pro’s advice along with the mir¬ 
ror. Who wants to sound like a dizzy Pollyanna? A no-brain 
Cheshire cat? A lonely recluse whose life is so dull that the big 
thrill of the day is a phone call? Any phone call? From anybody! 

Big winners don’t smile before answering. They put a smile in 
their voices after they hear who is on the line. That’s when it 
counts. Answer the phone unemotionally, professionally. Say your 
name or the name of your company. Then when you hear who is 
on the line, the little trick is to let a big smile flood over your face. 

“Oh Joe, [smile] how nice to hear from you!” “Sally, [smile] 
how are you?” “Bill, [smile] I was hoping it would be you.” 

My friend Steve lives in Washington, D.C., and heads a major 
trade association that lobbies on Capitol Hill. Whenever I call 
Steve, I never know which of his dozens of assistants is going to 


236 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Make ’Em Happy They Called You ipy 


answer. Nevertheless, whoever answers gives me the same warm 
response. 

First he or she says, “Cable Telecommunications Association,” 
the individual’s name, and “How may I direct your call?” No fake 
friendliness. No prefab smiles in the voice. I am sure the assistant 
is not beaming back at his- or herself in any mirror. 

When I say “Is Mr. Effros available? This is Leil Lowndes call¬ 
ing,” that’s when the employee becomes superfriendly. “Oh yes, 
Ms. Lowndes,” he or she purrs. “Definitely! Let me put you right 
through.” 

Wow, does that make me feel special! As I’m waiting for Steve 
to come to the phone, I fantasize him sitting at the head of a long 
mahogany table in his weekly staff meeting. I can just hear him 
instructing his staff, “Now if the president or some higher-ups in 
the White House call, put them right through. Oh, and of course, 
if that important woman Leil Lowndes calls, put her right 
through, too.” 

While visiting Washington last year, I had lunch with Steve. 
I took the opportunity to tell him what a pleasure it was to call 
his office and how I appreciated his staff’s warm phone reception. 
I thanked him for familiarizing each with my name and men¬ 
tioning I might be calling from time to time. Steve looked across 
the table at me and blinked. “Leil,” he said, “you teach telephone 
skills. Haven’t you caught on?” 

“Huh?” 

“Forgive me if I’m bursting a bubble,” Steve said, “but every¬ 
one gets that reception, no matter who’s calling.” 

“Oh!” 

When a Pain in the Neck Calls 

“But Steve,” I protested when I’d recuperated from the initial dis¬ 
appointment that I was a victim of a technique and not a VIP, 



238 How to Talk to Anyone 


“what if the caller is unknown, a complete stranger? Surely your 
staffers shouldn’t fake they know the caller.” 

“Of course not, Leil. In that case, I instruct them to show 
energy and enthusiasm over the reason they’re calling. For exam¬ 
ple, suppose the caller is a cable operator wanting to join our asso¬ 
ciation. The caller would get a smile and a sincere, ‘Oh yes, Mr. 
Smith, I’ll put you right through.’ ” 

“Yeah, but suppose the caller is selling office furniture?” I 
challenged. 

“Doesn’t matter,” Steve said. “The salesperson gets the same 
reception after the staffer hears why he’s calling. If my staffer says 
warmly, ‘Oh, office furniture!’ the caller feels good. And I find the 
salesperson is a lot easier to deal with later.” 

I told him, “OK, Steve, starting tomorrow morning, I’m going 
to put that ‘Oh wow, I’m so happy you called for that reason’ atti¬ 
tude in my voice.” 

The next morning, the first call was my dentist’s office. “Ms. 
Lowndes, this call is to remind you you’re overdue for your six- 
month checkup.” 

“Oh, of course, you’re so right,” I cooed. “I’m so glad you 
called.” The receptionist sounded surprised but very pleased at my 
reaction. “I can’t book an appointment right now,” I continued, 
“but I’ll call you as soon as my schedule frees up.” She didn’t has¬ 
sle me with her usual “Well, when do you expect that to be?” She 
just hung up satisfied. (And I got what I wanted—no call from 
my dentist’s office for at least another six months.) 

The second time the phone rang, it was a man who had 
ordered my tape set calling to complain that one of the tapes 
broke. “Oh my goodness, I’m so glad you told me about that,” I 
said with the enthusiasm of having won the lottery. The caller 
sounded a little shocked but obviously pleased at my reaction. “Of 
course, I’ll get another set out to you and I hope you accept my 
apologies.” Caller hung up satisfied. (And I got what I wanted— 



How to Make ’Em Happy They Called You 239 


his good will and word of mouth in spite of my tape duplicator’s 
blooper.) 

The third call was tougher. This was from a vendor I had com¬ 
pletely forgotten to pay. “Oh, I’m so glad you reminded me of that 
bill,” I lied. Again, shocked pleasure was the caller’s reaction. (I 
was probably the first creditor in history who ever sounded happy 
she’d called.) “In the back of my mind I felt there was one bill I 
had overlooked. I’m writing the check as we speak.” 

Then I got my reward. The dunner said, “By the way, don’t 
worry about the 2 percent per month late-payment charge. As long 
as we get your check by the end of the week, it will be OK.” She 
hung up happy. (And I got a present—no finance charges in spite 
of my oversight.) 

And so it went throughout the rest of the day, the rest of the 
week, and ever since. Try it. You’ll find you get a lot more from any¬ 
one when you smile, after you find out who it is or why they’re call¬ 
ing. Use the “Oh Wow, It’s You!” technique on almost every call. 

y\ 

Technique #62 

“Oh Wow, It’s You!” 

Don’t answer the phone with an “I’m just sooo happy 
all the time” attitude. Answer warmly, crisply, and 
professionally. Then, after you hear who is calling, let a 
huge smile of happiness engulf your entire face and 
spill over into your voice. You make your caller feel as 
though your giant warm fuzzy smile is reserved for him 
or her. 



# How to Sneak Past 
the Gatekeeper 


“No, No, Aaaaaagh, not The Screen!” Picture a torture device 
called “The Screen.” The mad scientist, laughing maniacally, 
forces the victim into a giant meat grinder that mashes him 
through a heavy-metal screen. It slices his body into a million mol¬ 
ecules before he’s reconstituted on the other side. Being screened 
when you call someone’s office is the emotional version of that 
ordeal. 

You place your cold call. “May I speak to Mr. Jones?” you 
pleasantly ask. 

“Who’s calling?” a haughty voice responds. Of course, your 
name is not prestigious enough for the screener to grant you the 
exalted status of speaking to Jones. 

Her ruthless interrogation continues, “And what company are 
you with?” You submit your company’s name, praying it will score 
with her. And then to top it off, she has the pluck to ask, “And 
what’s this in reference to?” Aaaaaagh! 

Several weeks after my luncheon with Steve, I had the occa¬ 
sion to call him again. “Is Steve Efifros available? This is Leil Lown¬ 
des calling.” 


240 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Sneak Past the Gatekeeper 241 


“Oh yes, Ms. Lowndes, definitely. Let me put you right 
through.” I start humming happily as I wait for Steve to come to 
the line. 

A moment later his assistant came back and said sympatheti¬ 
cally, “I’m so sorry, Ms. Lowndes. Steve just stepped out to lunch. 
I know he’ll be sorry he missed your call.” Meanwhile, I’m still 
smiling. Do I suspect that Steve didn’t “just step out to lunch”? 
Do I suspect he’s sitting right there? Do I ever, in my wildest para¬ 
noid dreams, think he doesn’t have the time or inclination to talk 
to me? Do I feel screened? No way! I’m as happy as a carefree kit¬ 
ten as I leave my number for a callback. You see, I have probably 
fallen for “The Sneaky Screen.” 


-V 


ECHNIQUE # 6 3 

The Sneaky Screen 


If you must screen your calls, instruct your staff to first 
say cheerfully, “Oh yes, I’ll put you right through. May 
I tell her who’s calling?” If the party has already 
identified himself, it’s “Oh of course, Mr. Whoozit. I’ll 
put you right through.” 

When the secretary comes back with the bad news 
that Mr. or Ms. Bigwig is unavailable, callers don’t take 
it personally and never feel screened. They fall for it 
every time, just like I did. 



How to Get What You 
Want on the Phone 
from Big Shots 


I know a secret about a big cat who owns an international hotel 
chain with properties in six countries. He hires and fires thou¬ 
sands, awards or pulls immense contracts, borrows from major 
financial institutions, and makes lavish contributions to charities. 
Mr. Big Cat (we’ll call him “Ed”) has a respected and immediately 
recognizable name in his industry. And here’s the secret: Mrs. Big 
Cat is the real brains behind the operation. 

I became friends with Mrs. Big Cat (we’ll call her “Sylvia”) 
when I did some consulting for her husband’s organization. Sylvia 
invited me to tea one afternoon. She sweetly apologized that this 
was “maid’s day off” so we’d have to fend for ourselves. As we hap¬ 
pily perched ourselves on the patio and were about to dive into 
our tea and crumpets, the phone rang. She excused herself to 
answer it. 

I heard Mrs. Big Cat say, “No, I’m sorry, he’s not in. Shall I 
tell him who called? . . . No, I don’t know when he is planning on 
returning, but if you give me your name and . . . No, I said I don’t 
know what time he’ll be back . . . Yes, I’ll tell him you called.” 

As Sylvia returned to the patio, I could she was annoyed by 
the call. Always on the lookout for a good phone story, I ventured 
a questioning look. 


242 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Get What You Want on the Phone from Big Shots 243 


Picking up on my curiosity, she said, “That fool thinks he’s 
going to get a contribution from Ed. Ha!” she laughed wryly Her 
candor emboldened me to ask her more. It turns out the caller, a 
Mr. Creighton, was a fund-raiser for a major charity Ed was con¬ 
sidering contributing to. My hostess said Creighton had called 
twice in the past two weeks when Ed was out. “And not once did 
he greet me, ask how I was, or apologize for the disturbance.” This 
did not please Mrs. Big Cat. 

Was it a major irritation for Mrs. Big Cat? No, only minor. 
But did it mean a major loss for the little cat who called? It sure 
did. In Ed and Sylvia Big Cat’s household, subtleties count. At the 
dinner table, Mrs. Big Cat could say to her husband, “A very nice 
man named Creighton called for you today, dear.” Or she might 
say, “A rather irritating chap named Creighton called for you 
today.” One comment or the other could mean millions won or 
lost by Creighton’s charity. And all because little cat Creighton 
mildly ruffled Mrs. Big Cat’s whiskers. 

Home advice: Salute the Spouse. Office advice: Salute the 
Secretary. 




ECHNIQUE #64 

Salute the Spouse 


Whenever you are calling someone’s home, always identify 
and greet the person who answers. Whenever you call 
someone’s office more than once or twice, make friends 
with the secretary. Anybody who is close enough to answer 
the phone is close enough to sway the VIP’s opinion of you. 


A surprising number of Big Cat spouses—and secretaries— 
have deep claws into important business decisions. When it comes 



244 How to Talk to Anyone 


hiring time, firing time, promoting time, or buying time, many 
spouses have a say. When it comes to whose calls get through, 
whose proposals get put on the top of the boss’s desk, who gets 
luncheon appointments made, secretaries’ opinions count! 

Only foolish callers don’t realize all spouses and secretaries 
have names. All spouses and secretaries have lives. All spouses and 
secretaries have feelings. All spouses and secretaries have influence. 
Deal accordingly. 



% How to Get What You 
Want-by Timing! 


When Alexander Graham Bell invented the phone, he and his 
comrades had no use for such trite phrases as “Hi, how ya doin’?” 
Bell and his boys never just started spouting their ideas into their 
listener’s ears. The first words out of their mouths in those times 
were “Can you talk?” Bell and his buddies were, of course, refer¬ 
ring to technical capabilities. 

Little did they know, more than a hundred years later, big 
winners would use a form of that same greeting. Today, of course, 
“Can you talk?” means “Is it convenient to talk?” Before launch¬ 
ing into conversation, they always ask “Is this a good time to chat?” 
“Did I catch you at a good time?” “Do you have a minute to dis¬ 
cuss the widget account?” 

All folks have a Big Ben in their brain that determines how 
receptive they are going to be to you and your ideas. When you 
mess with their internal cuckoo clock, they won’t listen to you. No 
matter how interesting your information, or how pleasant your 
call, bad timing means bad results for you. 

It’s not your fault. Whenever you call someone at home, you 
never know whether she was sleeping or whether there’s a fire rag¬ 
ing in the kitchen stove. Whenever you call someone at work, you 


24s 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



246 How to Talk to Anyone 


never know whether he’s got two hours to get a report in or 
whether the big boss is not-so-patiently sitting on his desk. 

Whenever you place a call, always—not occasionally, not fre¬ 
quently—always ask about your timing. Make it a habit. Make it 
a rule. Make it a self-punishable crime if the first words out of your 
mouth don’t concern the convenience of your timing: 

“Hi, Joe, is this a good time to talk?” 

“Hello, Susan. Have you got a minute?” 

“Hi, Carl, did I catch you good or did I catch you bad?” 

“Sam, do you have a second for me to tell you about what 
happened at the game last Saturday?” 

There are many ways to say it, but it all boils down to “Is this 
a good time to talk?” 

My friend Barry, a broadcaster, accomplishes more in a day 
than most people do in a week. He came up with a clever con¬ 
versational device that ensures he’ll never shatter anyone’s emo¬ 
tional sundial. He calls it “What Color Is Your Time?” Barry 
introduces the device by telling people he’s calling he has great 
respect for their time. He then asks permission to start his future 
conversations with a question that assures he’ll never disturb them 
at an inopportune moment. Barry says he’s going to ask what color 
their time is. They should honestly answer, “red,” “yellow,” or 
“green.” 

Red means “I’m really rushed.” 

Yellow means “I’m busy but what’s on your mind? If it’s quick, 
we can deal with it.” 

Green means “Sure, I’ve got time. Let’s talk.” 

Red, like the stoplight at the corner, means stop. Yellow means 
hurry up, time is short or stop and wait for the next green light. 
Green means go. 

Busy people pick up quickly on his artful device and enjoy the 
game. Most especially, they enjoy Barry’s sensitivity and respect 
for their time. In fact, he says, most of his callers play the same 



How to Get What You Want—by Timing! 2^y 


sensitive game when they call him. “Hi Barry, what color is your 
time? Are you green?” 


Salesfolks, Wait for the Green Light 

A note here for salespeople. If you ask a prospect if he or she has 
time to talk and the answer is “Not really, but tell me what’s on 
your mind,” DON’T! Do not make your sales pitch while he or 
she is red. Do not talk when he or she is yellow. Wait until green, 
very green. (If you ever want to see any green coming from your 
prospect, that is.) 


-V. 


ECHNIQUE #65 

What Color Is Your Time? 


No matter how urgent you think your call, always 
begin by asking the person about timing. Either use the 
What Color Is Your Time? device or simply ask, “Is this 
a convenient time for you to talk?” When you ask 
about timing first, you’ll never smash your footprints 
right in the middle of your telephone partner’s sands of 
time. You’ll never get a “No!” just because your timing 
wasn’t right. 



66 How to Impress 
Everyone with Your 
Outgoing Voicemail 
Message 


You can tell a lot about people just from the outgoing messages 
they leave on their voice mail. “Hello,” his machine answers. “I’m 
not in right now. But you probably don’t want to talk to me any¬ 
way.” Beep. Would you suspect this fellow has an inferiority 
complex? 

“Hello,” her machine answers. “The sound you hear is the 
barking of our killer Doberman pinscher, Wolf. Please leave a mes¬ 
sage after the tone.” Beep. Would you suspect this woman is wor¬ 
ried about break-ins? Most of us don’t record our personal foibles 
so conspicuously for the world to hear. Nevertheless, people can 
hear a lot between the lines of what we say on our voice mail. 

Last month I needed a graphic artist to do some work for one 
of my extremely conservative clients. I phoned Mark, an artist 
whose work I had seen and liked a lot. His answering machine 
blasted ear-splitting rock music through the receiver. Then his 
voice boomed over the electric guitar, “Hey there, dude, don’t be 
crude. Jes’ croon me an earful of sweeeeeeet sounds right at that 
lone tone. Yeah, yeah, yeah.” Beep. I banged the receiver quickly 


248 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Impress Everyone with Your Outgoing Voicemail Message 249 


back into the cradle to shut out horrible fantasies of how my client 
would react if he had to call Mark. His thirty-second talent show 
might have been an appropriate sample of a rock musician’s tal¬ 
ent. But a businessperson should opt for a more sedate outgoing 
message. The message you leave on your answering machine 
reflects your work. Keep yours friendly, neutral, and up-to-date. 

And here’s the secret: to give the impression you are really on 
top of your business, change your message every day. Studies show 
that callers perceive people to be brighter and more efficient when 
they hear an updated message each time they call. If appropriate, 
let callers know where you are and when you intend to be back. 
If you have customers who need to be attended to, this is crucial. 

Try something like this on your office phone: “This is (name). 
It’s Thursday, May 7, and I’ll be in a sales meeting until late this 
afternoon. Please leave your message and I’ll get back to you as 
soon as I return.” That way, if you don’t call a client back until 
4 p.m. he isn’t steaming. 

Also, keep it short. Some people change their message every 
day, but it’s too long. I had a colleague, a public speaker named 
Dan, who in his finest mellifluous voice imposed his thought for 
the day on all unsuspecting callers. 

Last year I was working on a project with Dan and had to call 
him three times in the same day to leave a progress report. Each 
time his machine answered: “Hello, this is Dan, and here’s my 
daily motivator.” He cleared his throat for his big recorded per¬ 
formance and then continued. “Did someone say something today 
that offended you? So what! That’s their problem.” He paused dra¬ 
matically. “Did someone look at you the wrong way? So what! 
That’s their problem.” Again, a pause for the magnitude of that 
sentiment to sink in. “Replace your petty thoughts of anger, exas¬ 
peration, and spite with thoughts of strength. Calm down. Rise 
above those little insignificant irritations in life. Focus your 
thoughts in the direction of fulfillment and accomplishment. Once 



How to Talk to Anyone 


again, this is Dan.” I’m surprised he didn’t also leave his agent’s 
phone number here. “Leave your message at the tone. And have a 
great peaceful day.” Beep. 

The first time I listened to Dan’s “inspirational” message, the 
length mildly irritated me. The second time, I found myself hyper¬ 
ventilating while waiting for him to get through his unbearably 
long message. By the third call, his schmaltzy message seemed 
interminable. I was filled with those “petty thoughts of anger, exas¬ 
peration, and spite” he warned against because of his darn mes¬ 
sage. I found it impossible to “rise above it” and “focus my 
thoughts in the direction of fulfillment and accomplishment.” I 
wanted to punch him in the nose. Outgoing messages are not the 
venues to give inspirational messages or to impress the world with 
one’s accomplishments. 

Another friend of mine, a writer, earned herself a few little cat 
stripes with this one on her machine: 

“Hello, this is Cheryl Smith. Cheryl is on her national book 
tour,” (she paused so all callers could be appropriately impressed) 
“making appearances in twelve cities.” (Another pause as though 
awaiting applause.) “She’ll be returning on October 7.” (What’s 
this “she” bit? Cheryl herself is speaking.) “Please leave your mes¬ 
sage for her at the tone.” Beep. 

Yes, Cheryl, we know you’re an important author. But your 
third-party reference to self, your narcissistic tone of voice, and 
topping it off with twelve cities would make any big cat snicker 
through his whiskers. 

One last codicil: Avoid one particular message many busi¬ 
nesspeople use these days—“I’m either away from my desk or on 
the other line.” The subtext of this message is “I’m a slave chained 
to my desk and it is an amazing fact that I have escaped for the 
moment.” One night I was working into the wee hours. At 4 a.m. 
I decided to leave a message on a colleague’s business phone so 
she’d get it as soon as she came in at nine. “Hello,” the message 



How to Impress Everyone with Your Outgoing Voicemail Message 251 


chirped. “This is Felicia. I’m either away from my desk or on the 
other line right now, but leave your message at the tone.” Beep. 
Felicia, of course you’re away from your desk—it’s 4 A.M. on Sun¬ 
day morning! “On the other line?” At this hour? I hope not! 

You never know how your message is going to affect some¬ 
one. Just keep yours neutral, friendly, constantly changing, short, 
and understated. No boasts, no bells, no whistles. 




ECHNIQUE #66 

Constantly Changing Outgoing Message 


If you want to be perceived as conscientious and 
reliable, leave a short, professional, and friendly 
greeting as your outgoing message. No music. No jokes. 
No inspirational messages. No boasts, bells, or whistles. 
And here’s the secret: change it every day. Your message 
doesn’t have to be flawless. A little cough or stammer 
gives a lovely unpretentious reality to your message. 



67 How to Get Them to 
[all You Back 


Producers of big Broadway musicals can be brutal during audi¬ 
tions. An anxious wanna-be star, after rehearsing his audition song 
for weeks, steps onstage. He opens his mouth to sing. After a few 
notes, the heartless producer shouts, “Thank you. NEEEXXXT!” 
Dreams of stardom dashed in ten seconds! 

Businesspeople’s professional dreams can also be dashed in the 
first ten seconds of their “audition.” Their audition is the message 
they leave on someone else’s answering machine. 

Competent businesspeople wouldn’t dream of sending a messy 
handwritten business letter to a VIP on cheap yellow-stained paper 
and expect a response. They know the recipient would toss it in 
the trash. Nevertheless, some of these same folks will leave a lack¬ 
luster message on a VIP’s voice mail and expect a callback. No one 
ever told them that big winners scrutinize messages on their voice 
mail with the same consideration of a big Broadway producer. If 
you sound good, you’ve got a chance. If you don’t, you are fast- 
forwarded out of their life. 

Salespeople, suitors, candidates, and competitors who leave 
crisp, intelligent, upbeat messages on voice mail get called back. 
Losers with lackluster tones and uncrafted messages never hear 
from Mr. or Ms. Make It Happen. Make sure your message 

2$2 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Get Them to Call You Back 233 


reflects three Cs: Confidence, Clarity, and Credibility. In addition, 
make it entice, entertain, or interest the listener. A flat “This is Joe, 
call me back” doesn’t score with big winners. 


Stay Tuned For . . . 

Radio DJs use tricks to keep their listeners tuned in. Top sales¬ 
people have similar little tricks to entice prospects to call them 
back. Here’s one called a cliff-hanger. To make sure listeners won’t 
switch stations during the radio commercial, the broadcaster 
throws out a mini-mystery: “And right after the commercial we’ll 
be back with the winning ticket ... It could be yours . . . Stay 
tuned!” Whenever you leave a voice mail message for anyone, try 
to include a cliff-hanger: “Hi, Harry, this is Andrew. I have the 
answer to that question you asked me last week.” Or “Hi Diane, 
this is Betsy. I have some big news about that project we were dis¬ 
cussing.” Now Harry and Diane have a reason to call Andrew and 
Betsy back. 

Pitch personality into your message, too. Picture the people 
listening to it. Say something to pique their curiosity or make them 
smile. The message you leave is your ten-second audition. Make 
it good. 




ECHNIQUE #67 

Your Ten-Second Audition 


While dialing, clear your throat. If an answering 
machine picks up, pretend the beep is a big Broadway 
producer saying “Nexxxt.” Now you’re on. This is Your 
Ten-Second Audition to prove you are worthy of a 
quick callback. 



2$4 How to Talk to Anyone 


Incidentally, if someone’s voice mail unexpectedly comes on 
and you are unprepared, quickly hang up (before the beep so they 
don’t get a hang-up message.) Take a moment to craft your enter¬ 
taining, enticing, or interesting message. Rehearse it once with 
confidence, clarity, and charisma. Then redial to leave your great 
hot message. 

A funny thing happens. If your party answers this time, you’ll 
be disappointed. 



&lt;fj How to Make the 
Gatekeeper Think 
You’re Buddy-Buddy 
with the VIP 


The inspiration for this next telephone technique comes from per¬ 
sonal experiences with mid-Manhattan toilets (a less-than-refined 
origin, to be sure). New York City, in spite of all its reputed sophis¬ 
tication, lags some of the shabbiest European cities in one respect. 
Manhattan has few public toilets. And none of those European- 
style, charming, and at times very much appreciated, freestanding 
structures on street corners. 

In the days when I made sales calls around the busy city of 
New York, this presented a problem. Several times a day. I often 
found myself at the mercy of coffee-shop cashiers who jealously 
guarded their restroom facilities. Some shops even put menacingly 
scribbled signs in the window, “Bathrooms are for customers only.” 

I often found that if I played it straight—going up to the 
cashier and asking if I could use the amenities—I’d get shot down. 
So I used the following technique. Without casting a glance at the 
cashier, I’d strut confidently into the coffee shop. I’d march right 
past the bathroom bouncer and keep my gaze fixed on one of the 
booths. She’d assume I was coming for lunch or had simply 


255 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



2$6 How to Talk to Anyone 


returned to collect my forgotten gloves. Once past the gatekeeper 
of the loo, I’d wait for her to be busy ringing up the next check. 
Then, like greased lightning, I’d sprint into the john. 

I dubbed this deception “The Ho-Hum Caper” after my 
feigned attitude of “Ho hum, business as usual. I come here every 
day with nothing on my mind but lunch.” 

Let us now translate that sneaky subterfuge into a seldom- 
fail phone technique. You can use the maneuver to sneak around 
secretaries and dodge their heartless screening. Instead of play¬ 
ing it straight and asking for your party by name, just say “Is he 
in?” or “Is she in?” Using the pronoun is verbally sprinting past 
the secretary with a business as usual, “Ho hum, I call every day” 
attitude. 


Zb 


ECHNIQUE #68 

The Ho-Hum Caper 

Instead of using your party’s name, casually let the 
pronoun he or she roll off your tongue. Forget “Uh, 
may I speak to Ms. Bigshot please?” Just announce, 

“Hi, Bob Smith here, is she in?” Tossing the familiar 
she off your tongue signals to the secretary that you and 
her boss are old buddies. 



69 How to Make Them 
Say You Have Super 
Sensitivity 


Whenever you’re on the phone with someone, you hear a lot more 
than their voices. In the background you might hear dogs bark¬ 
ing, babies crying, or a crackling sound. For all you know, the dog 
has his tail caught in the refrigerator, the baby has to be fed, or 
the house is on fire. When you acknowledge the sound by ask¬ 
ing if they have to take care of it, you warm the hearts of your 
listeners. 

When you are talking to someone at work, you often hear 
another phone ringing. Say immediately, “I hear your other line. 
Do you have to answer it?” Even if not, he or she will appreciate 
the gesture. If he does have to catch the other call, you can be sure 
he heard nothing you said after the first ring. He’s only thinking 
“How can I interrupt this babbling person without being rude so 
I can answer my other phone?” In fact with every brr-ing, irrita¬ 
tion sets in that you are holding him hostage from doing what he 
has to do. 

Here is the technique guaranteed to save you from being in 
that uncomfortable position. 

The subtext, of course, is that you are sensitive to what’s going 
on in your caller’s world. If you’re talking to someone far away or 
in another country, another way to show you’re tops in the com- 

257 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



258 How to Talk to Anyone 


munications department is to translate time references into their 
time zone. When you leave a message, say “I can be reached 
between three and five your time.” 


Zb 


ECHNIQUE #69 

“I Hear Your Other Line” 


When you hear a phone in the background, stop 
speaking—in midsentence, if necessary—and say “I 
hear your other line,” (or your dog barking, your baby 
crying, your spouse calling you). Ask whether she has 
to attend to it. Whether she does or not, she’ll know 
you’re a top communicator for asking. 


And don’t forget foreign holidays. Last July 1, I was on the 
phone with a client from Australia. I was impressed when he 
wished me “Happy Independence Day weekend.” So impressed, 
in fact, I ran out to find a chart of international holidays. I made 
a note in my calendar next January 26 to wish my Aussie friend 
“Happy Australia Day.” 

If you do business with people around the world, be sure to 
extend good wishes to them for their holidays. Forget about your 
own if they’re not shared. I’m still mortified about the time last 
November when I was on a conference call with a Canadian 
client and seven of his salespeople. I wished them all “Happy 
Thanksgiving.” 



70 How to “Listen 
Between the Lines” 
on the Phone 


The first time I saw The Wizard of Oz, the story bewitched me. 
The second time I saw The Wizard of Oz, the special effects 
amazed me. The third time I saw The Wizard of Oz, the photog¬ 
raphy dazzled me. Have you ever seen a movie twice, three times? 
You notice subtleties and hear sounds you completely missed the 
first time around. 

It’s the same on the phone. Hearing it is much better the sec¬ 
ond time around. Because your business conversations are more 
consequential than movies, you should listen to them two, maybe 
three times. Often we have no clear idea of what really happened 
in our phone conversation until we hear it again. You’ll find shad¬ 
ings more significant than the color of Toto’s collar—and more 
scarecrows than you imagined who “haven’t got a brain!” 

How do you listen to your important business conversations 
again? Simply legally and ethically tape-record them. I call the 
technique of recording and analyzing your business conversations 
for subtleties “Instant Replay.” 

Having a tape recorder on her phone could have made a dra¬ 
matic difference in the career of my friend Laura. Laura, a nutri¬ 
tionist, had developed an excellent health drink. It deserved to be 
marketed nationally. 


*59 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



260 How to Talk to Anyone 


I was in Laura’s office one day discussing her plans and I said, 
“Laura, I’ve got just the contact for you. Several months earlier, I 
had met Fred, a man who owned a chain of supermarkets. Fred 
owed me a favor because, at his request, I’d given a pro bono talk 
for a social club he belonged to. Fred was a big banana in the 
supermarket world, and with one “yes” he could put my friend’s 
health drink in his stores. That would launch Laura nationally. 

I placed the call and, lo and behold, he was in. And, an even 
bigger lo and behold, Fred sounded interested in Laura’s beverage. 

“Put her on,” Fred said. 

I proudly handed Laura the phone and their conversation 
started out fine. “Oh sure, I’ll send you a sample,” Laura said. 
“What’s the address?” Then I heard Laura say, “Uh, wait a minute, 
let me get something to write with.” (I rapidly rolled a pen and 
pushed a pad in front of her nose.) “Uh, what’s that again? Did 
you say 4201 or 4102? [I moan inaudibly.] And how do you spell 
the name of the street? [My moan becomes audible.] Whoops, this 
pen just ran out of ink. Leil, do you see another pen on my desk? 
[I did, and this time I felt like throwing it at her.] Sorry, what’s 
that again?” 

Yikes, now I wanted to grab the phone out of Laura’s hands. 
She shouldn’t be bothering a busy big banana for details like 
repeating addresses. She could have called his secretary back later 
for clarification. But even that would have been unnecessary if she 
were recording the conversation with the Instant Replay technique. 
She could have merely mentioned that she was flipping on the 
recorder (most heavy hitters are comfortable with that concept) 
and she would have had it on tape. 

Fred was nice to Laura that day. But my friend never heard 
back from him. And to this day, she wonders why. She’ll never 
know the confused phone exchange nixed the deal. 

Was Fred being unfair just because Laura was a little slow on 
the phone? Absolutely not. Fred figures, “If this woman is as insen- 



How to “Listen Betiveen the Lines” on the Phone 261 


sitive about my time at the beginning of a possible business rela¬ 
tionship, what’s she going to be like down the pike?” Wise choice, 
Fred. I still like Laura. She’s still my friend. But will I introduce 
her to any other big winners who might help her? I can’t take the 
chance. 


How to Set Up Your Instant Replay 

Instant Replay is simple and cheap. Go to your local electronics 
store and ask for a recorder for your telephone. Slap it on your 
phone receiver, and plug the other end into a cassette recorder. 
Then turn the recorder on during your next important conversa¬ 
tion. The device could earn you hundreds of dollars on your first 
call. In some states the law requires you inform the other party 
you are recording them. Make sure to check with the authorities 
about the legality in the state where you live. If it’s one-party con¬ 
sent, don’t worry. You’re the one party. Obviously you must never 
ever use the tape for any other purpose than for your own second 
listening. Not only would that be unlawful, but it would be uncon¬ 
scionable. For extra security, don’t leave people’s taped conversa¬ 
tions lying around. Keep the same tape in your cassette machine 
and use it over and over to record important details. 

With Instant Replay, you can catch balls your conversation 
partner throws out on the first bounce. You’re on the phone with 
your boss. Fie rambles off four or five names in a law firm you’re 
supposed to write to, then the address, then the nine-digit zip 
code. Realizing he’s pitched you some pretty fast balls, he asks, 
“Shall I repeat that for you?” “No thanks, I got it,” you proudly 
say, silently tapping your little tape recorder. Boss is impressed. 

Yet another benefit of Instant Replay—it helps hide your 
ignorance. Recently I was on the phone with a cameraman nego¬ 
tiating a price on a videotape to use as a speaker’s demo. Luckily 
I was recording the conversation because his flurry of Hi-8, VHS, 



262 How to Talk to Anyone 


Super VHS, Beta SP, and three-quarter-inch U-matic had me 
wanting to crawl into a rodent hole in the wall. But I listened to 
the tape of our conversation afterward. I wrote down all the words 
I didn’t understand and then asked a video friend what they 
meant. Now I was able to call the cameraman back and say, “I’d 
like a two-camera shoot on Beta SP. And can you give me a VHS 
dub so I can do some off-line editing?” Don’t you think I got a 
much better price than if I’d asked, “Duh, what’s a Beta SP?” 


4 * 


ECHNIQUE #70 

Instant Replay 


Record all your business conversations and listen to 
them again. The second or third time, you pick up on 
significant subtleties you missed the first time. It’s like 
football fans who often don’t know if there was a 
fumble until they see it all over again in Instant Replay. 


Forget What They Said, Hear What 
They Meant 

Instant Replay also makes you sensitive to levels of communica¬ 
tion far deeper than just your callers’ words. You tune in to their 
real enthusiasm or hesitation about an idea. 

When we want something, our minds play funny tricks on us. 
If we desperately crave “yes” from someone, we hear “yes.” But 
“yes” isn’t always what it seems. A client’s forceful “YES” and her 
hesitant “yeee-sss” are different as heaven and hell. Last month I 
asked a woman who’d booked me for a speech if her office could 
reproduce my ten-page handout. She gave me the answer I wanted, 
which was “yes.” Later, however, I relistened to our conversation 



How to “Listen Between the Lines” on the Phone 263 


on tape. Her answer about the handouts had been a very hesitant, 
“Hmm, well, yes.” I immediately called her back and said, “By the 
way, don’t worry about those handouts.” 

“Oh, I’m so glad!” she purred. “Because we really don’t have 
the budget for things like that.” I gained much more in my client’s 
goodwill than the value of reproducing a few sheets of paper. 

Let us now return to your live, in-person show. We’re going 
to talk not only about how to be a hit at a party, but how to 
smoothly hit on all the folks you want—just like a politician. 



This page intentionally left blank. 



PART EIGHT 

How to Work a Party 
Like a Politician 
Works a Room 


The Politicians Six-Point 
Party Checklist 


When invited to a party, most of us waft into a fluffy thought pro¬ 
cess. Our random reverie goes something like this: “Hmm, this 
could be fun. . . . Wonder if they’re going to serve food. . . . Hope 
it’s good. . . . Might be some interesting people there. . . . Won¬ 
der if my friend so ’n so is coming. .. . Golly, what should I wear?” 

That’s not the way a politician thinks about a party, however. 
While politicians, heavy-duty networkers, serious socializers, and 
big winners in the business world are staring at the invitation, they 
instinctively surf to a different channel. Before they RSVP with 
“yes” or “no,” their brains craft journalistic campaign questions. 
It’s the Six-Point Party Checklist. Who? When? What? Why? 
Where? And How? 

Let’s take them one by one. 


265 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



266 How to Talk to Anyone 


Who Is Going to Be at 
the Party? 

More specifically, who will be there that I should meet? Serious 
networkers calculate “Who must I meet for business? Who should 
I meet for political or social reasons?” And, if single and search¬ 
ing, “Who do I want to meet for possible love?” 

If they don’t know who is going to be in attendance, they ask. 
Politicians unabashedly telephone the host or hostess of the party 
and ask, “Who’s coming?” As the party giver chats casually about 
the guest list, politicians scribble the names of the people who 
interest them, then resolve to meet each. 


When Should I Arrive? 

Politicians do not leave arrival time to whenever they finish get¬ 
ting dressed. They don’t ask themselves, “Hmm, should I be fash¬ 
ionably late?” They carefully calculate their estimated time of 
arrival and estimated time of departure. 

If the party is bulging with contacts, biggies get there early to 
start hitting their marks as each arrives. VIPs frequently come early 
to get their business done before party regulars who “hate to be 
the first one there” start arriving. They are never embarrassed to 
arrive early. After all, the only people who see them are other early 
arrivals who are often heavy hitters like themselves. 

Nor will you find politicians prowling around, the last to slink 
out the door. Once they’ve accomplished what they set out to do, 
they’re on their way to the next opportunity. If their agenda is 
more social, they try to leave their departure time open and their 
apres-party schedule free. That way, if they make an important 
new contact, they can stay around and talk with him. Or drive her 
home. Or go somewhere else for coffee. 



How to Work a Party Like a Politician Works a Room 267 


What Should I Take with Me? 

A politician’s checklist is not the usual, “Let’s see, my comb, 
cologne, and breath mints.” They pack more functional network¬ 
ing tools in their pockets or purses. 

If corporate cats will be prowling the party, they pack a pock¬ 
etful of business cards. If it’s a gala where people are gadding about 
on the social ladder and they want to exude old-world elegance, 
they grab a handful of social cards containing only their name and 
possibly an address and phone number. (Some feel giving out a 
business card in a purely social setting can be gauche.) The most 
vital tool in their party pack is a small pad and pen to keep track 
of important contacts. 


Why Is the Party Being Given? 

The politician’s perpetual philosophy of “penetrate the ostensible” 
enters here. (That’s just a fancy way of saying “look under the 
rug.”) They ask themselves, “What is the ostensible reason for the 
party?” A big industrialist is giving his daughter a graduation 
party? A newly divorced executive is throwing himself a birthday 
bash? A floundering business is celebrating its tenth year? 

“Nice,” politicians say to themselves, “that’s the ostensible. But 
what’s the real reason for the party?” Maybe the industrialist wants 
to get his daughter a good job so he’s invited dozens of potential 
employers. The birthday boy is single again so the guest list is 
heavy with attractive and accomplished females. The business des¬ 
perately needs good PR if it’s going to stay around another ten 
years. So they’ve invited the press and community makers and 
shakers. 

Politicians have expert under-rug vision to spot the host’s real 
agenda. They will, of course, never discuss it at the party. How- 



268 How to Talk to Anyone 


ever, the insight elevates them to a shared state of higher con¬ 
sciousness with other heavy hitters at the bash. 

Their knowledge also makes them valuable agents for the 
party giver. A savvy politician introduces the job-seeking daugh¬ 
ter to some executives at the party or tells the most alluring women 
at the bash what a great guy birthday boy is. When chatting with 
reporters, he talks up the host’s business that needs good PR. 
When people support the real why of the party, they become 
popular and sought-after guests for future events. 

Where Is the Collective Mind? 

Often people from one profession or one interest group will com¬ 
prise most of the guest list. A politician never accepts any invita¬ 
tion without asking herself, “What kind of people will be at this 
party, and what will they be thinking about?” Perhaps there will 
be a drove of doctors. So she clicks on the latest medical headlines 
and rehearses a little doc-talk. If the guests are a nest of new-age 
voters, the politician gets up to speed on telepathic healing, Tantric 
toning, and trance dancing. Politicians can’t afford to not be in the 
know. 

How Am I Going to Follow Up on 
the Party? 

Now, the big finale. I call it “Contact Cement.” It’s cementing the 
contacts the politician has made. After meeting a good contact 
and exchanging cards, practically everyone says, “It’s been great 
talking to you. We’ll stay in touch.” 

This good intention seldom happens without herculean effort. 
Politicians, however, make a science out of keeping up the con¬ 
tact. After the party, they sit at their desks and, like a game of soli¬ 
taire, lay out the business cards of the people they’ve met. Using 



How to Work a Party Like a Politician Works a Room 269 


“The Business Card Dossier” technique described later in this sec¬ 
tion, they decide how, when, and if to deal with each. Does this 
person require a phone call? Should that one receive a handwrit¬ 
ten note? Shall I E-mail or call the other one? 

Use the Six-Point Party Checklist—the Who? When? Why? 
Where? What? and How? of a party—as your general game plan. 
Now let’s get down to specifics. 



7 1 How to Avoid the Most 
Common Party Blooper 


The average party goer, let’s say Charlie, arrives at the bash. He 
makes a beeline for the refreshment table for munchies and a bev¬ 
erage. He then finds a few buddies and starts chatting away with 
them. 

Chewing the nibbles on his plate and the fat with his friends, 
he occasionally looks around the room to see who might be new 
and fun to talk to. He’s hoping several attractive and interesting 
people at the party will spot him and come over to talk. 

What’s wrong with Charlie’s approach? Everything, if Char¬ 
lie wants to make the party productive. Let’s start with the aver¬ 
age party goer’s first mistake—getting some refreshments and a 
drink right off the bat. 

People mingling at a party make judgments, often subcon¬ 
scious, about whom they are going to approach. Have you ever 
lived on a farm? Or had a dog or a cat? Then you know you never 
disturb animals when they are eating. Likewise, when a human 
animal is eating, other human animals do not feel comfortable 
advancing. If party goers’ eyes scan the crowd and see you with 
the feed bag on, they pass right over you. Subconsciously they’re 
saying to themselves, “Let the hungry hound chow down and 


2JO 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Avoid the Most Common Party Blooper 2ji 


maybe we’ll talk later.” Later never comes because they wind up 
making friends with someone else whose mouth wasn’t full. 

Politicians always eat before they come to the party. They 
know they’d need a circus juggler’s talent to shake hands, exchange 
business cards, hold a drink, and stuff crackers and cheese into 
their mouths—all with just two hands. 




ECHNIQUE #71 

Munching or Mingling 


Politicians want to be eyeball to eyeball and belly to 
belly with their constituents. Like any big winner well 
versed in the science of proxemics and spatial 
relationships, they know any object except their belt 
buckle has the effect of a brick wall between two 
people. Therefore they never hold food or drink at a 
party. 

Come to munch or come to mingle. But do not 
expect to do both. Like a good politician, chow down 
before you come. 



72 How to Make an 
Unforgettable Entrance 


Loretta Young makes television history when she appears at the 
head of her immense staircase and surveys the set. Then she 
swoops down to start the show. 

The Pope steps out onto his balcony overlooking St. Peter’s 
Square in Rome and surveys the crowd. Then he begins the 
benediction. 

Bette Davis stops in the doorway and looks around. Then she 
mutters, “What a dump!” 

And every late-night TV comic since “Heeeere’s Johnny!” 
steps center stage and scrutinizes the applauding audience. Then 
he reveals the reason for the smirk on his face. 

What do all these great entrances have in common? Each 
pauses momentarily and looks around before swooping into deci¬ 
sive action. 

Movie directors love shots of THE DOORWAY where the 
camera pans, the music swells, and all eyes gravitate to the hon¬ 
cho or honchoette standing under the frame. Does the star skulk 
into the room like a frightened little kitten in a new owner’s home? 
Or, like many of us do at a party, frantically gravitate to the first 
familiar face so people won’t think he or she’s unconnected? No, 

2J2 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Make an Unforgettable Entrance 275 


the star stops. Then, framed by the doorway, his or her notable 
presence is felt by all. 

People who have mastered this trick have what envious the¬ 
atrical wanna-bes call “stage presence.” Stage groupies think some 
lucky stars are born with it. Think again, thespians. It’s cultivated. 
Politicians don’t just slink unnoticed into a roomful of people. 
Politicians make The Entrance. 

With one simple technique, you too can make great entrances. 
I call it “Rubberneck the Room.” Before entering, stop dramatically 
in the doorway and survey the scene s-l-o-w-l-y with your eyes. It 
is significant that, while you’re standing in the doorway, you’re not 
thinking, “Look at me.” The reason you’re Rubbernecking the 
Room is not to show off. It is so you can diagnose the situation 
you’re walking into. Take note of the lighting, the bar, and most 
important, the faces. Listen to the music, the buzz of the crowd, the 
clinking of glasses. See who is talking to whom. While rubber¬ 
necking, you’ll also be using “Be the Chooser, Not the Choosee,” 
the next technique, which helps you select your first, second, and 
maybe third target. Now, like the big cat who rules the jungle, leap 
in to make your first move toward wiping up the room. 

yL 

Technique #72 

Rubberneck the Room 

When you arrive at the gathering, stop dramatically in 
the doorway. Then s-l-o-w-l-y survey the situation. Let 
your eyes travel back and forth like a SWAT team 
ready in a heartbeat to wipe out anything that moves. 


In tandem with Rubberneck the Room, try using the follow¬ 
ing technique. 



73 How to Meet the 
People YOU Want 
to Meet 


Politicians don’t wait for others to approach them. If the party host 
or their campaign manager has not supplied a “must meet” list, 
they choose their targets while Rubbernecking the Room. As their 
keen eyes scan the crowd, they’re asking themselves “Who would 
I most enjoy talking to? Who looks like they could be most ben¬ 
eficial to my life? Who could I learn most from in this gang?” 

How do they choose? They look at everyone the same way my 
friend, Bob, the caricature artist, looks at people. You can tell a 
whole lot more than you realize if you keep your gaze fixed on 
someone. Every twinkle in someone’s eye and every line sur¬ 
rounding it tells a story—the story of the life he or she leads. Who 
was it who said, “At age thirty, everyone has the face he deserves”? 
Yet few of us consciously look into strangers’ eyes. How foolish 
that, at a party or convention for making contacts, most people 
are embarrassed to make eye contact with people we don’t know. 

In my networking seminar, I prime participants to make 
intense visual contact by asking them to form a big circle, walk 
around the room, and silently stare at each other. “Gaze into each 
other’s eyes,” I tell them. “Examine each other’s movements.” 

As they are walking, I say, “The most important business con¬ 
tact, the dearest friend, or the love of your life is probably not in 

274 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Meet the People YOU Want to Meet 277 


this room. Nevertheless, sometime soon, you will be in a room 
where you will spot someone you sense could change your life. I 
want you to be prepared. I want you to have the courage to make 
the approach and not wait in vain for that special someone to 
approach you.” While strolling and staring, I ask them to silently 
choose the four people they most want to talk to during the break. 

“Only the Beautiful People Will 
Be Chosen” 

When given this unfamiliar and uncomfortable assignment, the 
participants assume everyone will make a beeline for the most 
attractive people. It never happens. Something mystical occurs 
when people take the time to really look at each other. Everyone 
discovers a distinctive beauty in one or two other people that is 
very personal, very special, and speaks uniquely to the seeker. 

The dearest friend in my life was a homely little fellow named 
Chip. He was only 5 feet 2 inches tall. Chip had a huge nose and 
funny little eyes peeping out through thick glasses. At a party, 
without using this technique, I probably would never have noticed 
Chip. However, my concentration was on him the day we met 
because he was giving a speech. When I gazed intently into his 
eyes and watched his lips moving, I saw such subjective beauty 
coming from his face. He became my best friend for twelve years 
until a tragic disease took his life. Nevertheless, Chip remained 
beautiful to me until the end because, no matter how twisted his 
body became with illness, the beauty shone through his spirit. 

As the seminar participants explore each other’s faces and 
movements, they discover the subjective beauty in their faces, in 
their spirits. No one can explain why one person chooses another 
as one of his or her special four. Yet practically everyone returns 
from the break having made a new good friend. Never is anyone 
left unchosen. 



2y6 How to Talk to Anyone 


When you seek people’s special qualities by exploring their 
faces, you will find them. If you want to walk out of any gather¬ 
ing with your life enhanced, spend time with people you choose, 
not just those who choose you. Be choosey in who you pick. But 
don’t wait to be the choosee. 


4 * 


ECHNIQUE #73 

Be the Chooser, Not the Choosee 


The lifelong friend, the love of your life, or the business 
contact who will transform your future may not be at 
the party. However, someday, somewhere, he or she will 
be. Make every party a rehearsal for the big event. 

Do not stand around waiting for the moment when 
that special person approaches you. You make it happen 
by exploring every face in the room. No more “ships 
passing in the night.” Capture whatever or whomever 
you want in your life. 


“Sure, in a Seminar, It’s Easy, but 
What About Real Life?” 

Sometimes, after the break, a participant will say, “It was simple 
to go up to people I wanted to talk to this time because you gave 
it as an assignment. But what about at a real party?” Recently, one 
of my participants named Todd asked me this question in front of 
the group. 

I asked, “Todd, how did you make the approach this time?” 
“Well, I just went up and said, ‘Hi, I’m Todd. I wanted to talk 
to you.’ ” 

“Well?” I asked. 



How to Meet the People YOU Want to Meet 277 


It dawned on him that he could use this opening phrase to 
meet anyone at any party. To smooth a potentially awkward 
moment, you quickly follow up with an innocuous question like 
“How do you know the hostess?” or “Do you live in the area?” 
Now, you’re off and running just as though the host had intro¬ 
duced you. 

Of course, other choosey people will be prowling around the 
party. Some of them, after scrutinizing you, will decide you are 
one of the special people they choose to talk to. The following is 
a subliminal maneuver to make it easy for them come over to con¬ 
firm they made a wise choice. 



74 How to Subliminally 
Lure People to You at 
a Gathering 


Have you ever noticed how comfortable you feel sauntering into 
certain rooms? The chairs are arranged in a way that welcomes 
you as if saying, “Come right on in and sit on me.” Conversely, 
you enter other rooms where you must navigate a circuitous route 
around tables and dressers before you finally find a free chair. 

Likewise, some people arrange their body furniture, their arms 
and legs, to say, “Hey, come right on over and talk to me.” Yet 
other people’s body furniture shouts, “Keep out! Approach at your 
own risk.” Shy people inadvertently say “stay away” when they fold 
their arms. They give off insecure signals by clutching a purse, 
clasping a drink, or smoking a cigarette. 

Controlled studies show that party goers are more comfort¬ 
able approaching people who stand with an open body, arms 
uncrossed and hanging at their sides, legs slightly separated, a slight 
smile on their faces. Any object between you and the crowd is a 
subliminal cutoff—even your purse. More people approach a 
woman who sports a shoulder bag than one squeezing a handbag. 
The shoulder bag hangs behind her back, thus leaving the path to 
talk to her open. 


278 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Subliminally Lure People to You at a Gathering 2jp 


Give Them the OF Wrist Flash 

Now, here’s the piece de resistance. Next to your face, your wrists 
and palms are one of the most expressive parts of your body. Palms 
up speak volumes of good sentiments. 

The Pope’s wrists and palms are up when he beckons “Come 
unto me my brethren.” The burglar’s wrists and palms are up 
when he says, “I give up, don’t shoot.” The innocent man’s wrists 
and palms are up when he’s saying, “I don’t know who took 
the money.” Vulnerable, open palms signify “I have nothing to 
hide.” 

They also signify acceptance. When you are listening to a 
business colleague to whom you want to signal acceptance, make 
sure your wrists and palms are up. Even if you’re resting your head 
on your chin, turn your wrists forward. Whenever you are chat¬ 
ting with anyone, give yourself a constant hand check. Make sure 
you don’t point your knuckles directly toward anyone. Let them 
have the pleasure of seeing the soft, tender “come hither” skin of 
your wrists and palms, not the wrinkled “go away” hide on your 
knuckles. 

Romance on your mind? Ladies, let your hands do some talk¬ 
ing for you. Women instinctively turn their wrists and palms 
upward when a man excites them. (In fact, the of wrist flash while 
talking with males subconsciously gives them a sexy jolt.) 


Pave a Clear Path for People Who 
Find You Special 

frightened little jungle cats crouch behind rocks and logs so no 
bigger animals will spot them. In the social jungle, shy people do 
the same. They instinctively seek out corners and sit in seats where 
they won’t be seen. 



280 How to Talk to Anyone 


Zh 


ECHNIQUE #74 

Come-Hither Hands 


Be a human magnet, not a human repellent. When 
standing at a gathering, arrange your body in an open 
position—especially your arms and hands. People 
instinctively gravitate toward open palms and wrists 
seductively arranged in the “come hither” position. 
They shy away from knuckles in the “get lost or I’ll 
punch you” position. Use your wrists and palms to say 
“I have nothing to hide,” “I accept you and what you’re 
saying,” or “I find you sexy.” 


Whereas lynxes and lions stroll confidently to the center of 
the jungle clearing, human big cats in the social jungle also stand 
confidently in a clearing so others can see them. Like a politician, 
position yourself near a doorway since everyone must pass your 
way at some point in the evening. 

Now we come to a technique all politicians use. In fact, some 
political pundits have credited the election of both John Kennedy 
and Bill Clinton to their mastery of the technique I call “Tracking.” 




How to Make ’Em Feel 
Like a Movie Star 


In the 1940s, movies were different. Before experimental films, cin¬ 
ema verite, and nouvelle vague, they had stories. Americans 
hopped in their Buicks—a foxtail tied to the radio antenna and 
baby boots suspended from the rearview mirror—drove to the 
movie house, and watched a story unfold before them. 

Almost invariably, the hero and heroine on the silver screen 
would meet, fall in love, overcome seemingly impossible obstacles, 
get married, and (presumably) live happily after. Oh, the stories 
varied slightly. But there was always a leading man and maybe a 
leading woman. Then there was the rest of the world. The sup¬ 
porting characters could live or die without much brouhaha. But 
every minor event in the star’s life was significant. 

Well, movies may have changed. Human nature hasn’t. Every¬ 
one feels like the star of a 1940s movie. Every trivial event in their 
lives is momentous. “There’s ME. Then there’s the rest of the 
world.” 

What someone had for breakfast, what shoes he chose to wear, 
and whether he took time to floss his teeth can be more impor¬ 
tant to that particular someone than the fall of faraway nations or 
the rise of global temperatures. 

Husbands and wives sometimes share their spouse’s minutiae: 

281 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



282 How to Talk to Anyone 


“What did you have for breakfast, Honey?” 

“You didn’t wear those shoes, did you?” 

“Did you remember to floss?” 

To create an interesting intimacy, big winners make a point to 
remember minute details of important contacts’ lives. They obvi¬ 
ously don’t feign interest in what they had for breakfast or whether 
they flossed or forgot. But to make someone feel like a big star, 
they remember details their contact does happen to share. 

Take their lead. If a prospect mentions he had Rice Krispies 
for breakfast, allude to it later. If, in chatting, your boss tells you 
she wore uncomfortable shoes to work one day, find a way to refer 
to it on another. If your client mentions he’s a resolute flosser, com¬ 
pliment him at a later date on his discipline. It hints he or she is a 
memorable star in the galaxy of people you’ve met. It’s called 
“Tracking” their lives. When you track their minutiae, you make 
them feel like 1940s movie stars and that minor events in their lives 
are major concerns in yours. 


Don’t Leave It to Chance 

Politicians make a science out of Tracking. They keep a little black 
box either on their desk, in their computer, or in their brain of the 
last concern, enthusiasm, or event discussed with everyone in their 
life. They keep track of where the people were, what they said, 
and what they were doing since the last conversation. Then the 
first words of the next phone call or meeting with that person 
relates to that information: 

“Hello, Joe. How was your trip to Jamaica?” 

“Hey Sam, did your kid make the baseball team?” 

“Hi, Sally. Have you heard back from your client yet?” 

“Nice to hear from you, Bob. It means you survived that 
Szechuan restaurant you were going to last time we spoke.” 



How to Make ’Em Feel Like a Movie Star 283 


When you invoke the last major or minor event in anyone’s 
life, it confirms what they’ve known all along. They’re the most 
important person in the world. 

One of the most powerful forms of tracking is remembering 
anniversaries of people’s personal achievements. Did your boss get 
promoted to her present position one year ago today? Did your 
client go public? How much more memorable than a birthday card 
to send a one-year congratulations note. 

Remembering people’s private passions is another. Several 
years ago, I wrote regularly for a magazine. My then-editor, Car¬ 
rie, was obsessed with her new kitten named Cookie. Recently I 
ran into Carrie at a writer’s conference. In early conversation I said 
to her, “I guess Cookie’s a full-grown cat by now. How is she?” 
Carrie’s astonished smile was my reward. 

“Leil,” she squealed, “I can’t believe you remember Cookie. 
Yes, she’s fine now and ...” Carrie went on for another ten min¬ 
utes about Cookie, the now full-grown cat. 

Technique #75 

Tracking 

Like an air-traffic controller, track the tiniest details of 
your conversation partners’ lives. Refer to them in your 
conversation like a major news story. It creates a power¬ 
ful sense of intimacy. 

When you invoke the last major or minor event in 
anyone’s life, it confirms the deep conviction that he or 
she is an old-style hero around whom the world 
revolves. And people love you for recognizing their 
stardom. 



284 How to Talk to Anyone 


A week later I got a call from Carrie asking me if I’d do a big 
story for her magazine. Did she think of me because I used the 
Tracking technique and remembered Cookie? Nobody can say, 
but I have my suspicions. I’ve seen the Tracking technique work 
on too many people to assume the rewards are coincidental. 

How do politicians remember so many facts to track about so 
many people? They use the following technique. 



7^ How to Amaze Them 
with What You 
Remember About Them 


Several years ago, I attended a political fund-raising event in a 
Midwestern state. One guest intrigued me. Sometimes I’d see him 
in animated conversation with several people. Other times, he’d 
be standing alone scribbling something on a card in his hand. 
Then the next time I’d look up, he’d be chatting it up with some¬ 
one else. The next minute, he’d be scribbling in his hand again. 
He repeated this pattern for over an hour. I became as curious as 
a nosy neighbor. Who was this fellow? 

At one point during the evening, I was standing alone by the 
refreshment table. He came up to me with a big smile, a warm 
handshake, and introduced himself. “Hi, I’m Joe Smith.” He asked 
me what I was drinking. I told him white wine and we started dis¬ 
cussing preferences. I happened to mention my favorite white was 
Sancerre. While we talked, I had to bite my tongue to resist ask¬ 
ing him what he’d been up to with the feverish note taking. 

A few minutes later, I spotted a friend across the room and 
excused myself. He asked for my card and, as I walked away, I 
peeked over my shoulder. I knew it! There he was, scribbling on 
my card. That was my opening. I turned back and, trying to pass 
my inquiry off as a joke, said, “Hey, I didn’t give you my meas¬ 
urements. What’s that you’re writing?” 

2&lt;?y 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



286 How to Talk to Anyone 


He gave a hearty laugh at my tasteless joke and said, “You 
caught me!” He turned over my card and I saw one word written 
on it: Sancerre. Then, to assuage my paranoia, he emptied his 
pocketful of people’s business cards to show me scribbles on the 
back of each. I assumed it was just Joes little system to help him 
remember people. It wasn’t until months later that I saw the 
method to his madness. 

One morning I went to my mailbox and found a personal 
postcard from Joe. He told me he was running for state senator. 
Then at the bottom of the card, he’d written, “Had any good 
Sancerre lately?” That won my heart. Had I lived in his state, a lit¬ 
tle touch like that might have swayed my vote to him. 

yL 

Technique #76 

The Business Card Dossier 

Right after you’ve talked to someone at a party, take 
out your pen. On the back of his or her business card 
write notes to remind you of the conversation: his 
favorite restaurant, sport, movie, or drink; whom she 
admires, where she grew up, a high school honor; or 
maybe a joke he told. 

In your next communication, toss off a reference to 
the favorite restaurant, sport, movie, drink, hometown, 
high school honor. Or reprieve the laugh over the great 
joke. 


They may not jump up and down asking, “How did you 
remember that?” Nevertheless, they will remember you. No 
matter how important the VIP, he or she senses a special kinship 



How to Amaze Them with What You Remember About Them 28y 


with the person who refers to other than their usual well-known 
accomplishments. 

Politicians are constantly selling themselves. (If you’ve ever 
wondered why America is called “The Land of Promise,” just keep 
your ears open in election year.) But, of course, to know what to 
promise people, politicians use the next super sales technique called 
“Eyeball Selling.” 




How to Make the Sale 
with Your Eyeballs 


The percentage of sales that Jimmi, a good friend of mine, makes 
is not to be believed. Even his sales manager doesn’t know how he 
does it. But I do. Because he told me. 

Jimmi says the fancy sales techniques he’s learned over the 
years (Benefits Selling, Partnering, Selling to Personality Types, 
Value-Added Concept, Rejection Proofing, Spin Selling) all pale 
next to what he calls “Eyeball Selling.” 

Eyeball Selling is not memorizing two dozen closing tech¬ 
niques. Nor is it verbally sparring with a customer to overcome 
objections. Jimmi says it’s quite simply keeping his eyes open, 
watching his customer’s reactions, and adjusting his sales pitch 
according to how his customer’s body moves. 

While Jimmi is giving his sales pitch, he’s concentrating more 
on how his customer fidgets, twitches, and squirms than on what 
he’s saying. He’s scrutinizing his customer’s involuntary head move¬ 
ments. He’s studying her hand gestures, her body rotation, her facial 
expressions—even her eye fluctuations. Jimmi says when his cus¬ 
tomer is not saying a word, even if she’s trying to give you a poker 
face, she cannot not communicate. She may not say in words how 
receptive she is to your pitch, but she’s clearly telling you nonethe¬ 
less. Jimmi says knowing what turns a prospect on, what turns her 
off, and what leaves her neutral from moment to moment can make 
or break the sale. 

288 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Make the Sale with Your Eyeballs 289 


How Jimmi Finds Out Where the 
Buck Stops 

The product Jimmi sells is expensive lighting equipment. Often 
he must make sales presentations to groups of ten, twenty, or more 
people. He says, “The first challenge in Eyeball Selling is discov¬ 
ering who the real decision maker is.” 

Jimmi meets his challenge in an unorthodox (not necessarily 
recommended) way. Right after “Good afternoon, gentlemen and 
ladies,” he says something slightly confusing. Why? Because the 
surprised group doesn’t know how to react. So their heads all twirl 
like weather vanes on a windy day to look at—guess who?—the 
honcho, the heavyweight, the head man or woman. Now Jimmi’s 
got his decision maker so he can continue Eyeball Selling to that 
person. 


What to Do When You Get Your Cue 

Some signals are obvious,” Jimmi says. “People shrug their shoul¬ 
ders for indifference, tap their fingers for impatience, or loosen 
their collar when they feel uncomfortable. But there are hundreds 
of other unconscious gestures I keep my antennae tuned for. 

“For example, I watch the exact angle of my prospect’s head 
position. If it’s fully facing me, especially if it’s cocked at a cute 
little angle, it means they’re interested. In that case, I keep right 
on talking. But if their head is slightly turning away, that’s a bad 
sign. I take it as a cue to change the subject and maybe talk about 
a different benefit of my product.” 

Jimmi not only tailors what he’s saying to his customers’ reac¬ 
tions, but he actively takes steps to change his prospect’s body posi¬ 
tion if he feels it’s not receptive. He says, “The body must be open 
before the mind can follow.” For example, he continues, “If your 
customer has his arms crossed in front of his chest, hand him some¬ 
thing to look at so he has to unfold them to take it from you.” Jimmi 



2po How to Talk to Anyone 


always carries a briefcase full of props to break down the barriers. 
He has photos of his wife and kids to hand married prospects, snap¬ 
shots of his Skye terrier for customers that have a dog, an antique 
watch to show antique lovers, and a pocket-size computer to show 
gadget fanatics. Jimmi says, “As long as I can get them to open their 
arms to reach for something, I have a shot at their minds.” 

Jimmi also paces the timing of his pitch to match his cus¬ 
tomers’ covert reactions. When his client reaches for an object, he 
takes it as a cue to talk slower or just be quiet. Reaching for a paper 
clip or fondling a folder on the desk says, “I’m thinking about it.” 

Of course, Jimmi is on constant lookout for sales-ready sig¬ 
nals like picking up the contract, fondling the pen, or turning their 
palms up. At that point, he cuts quickly to the close. 

Another cue to bring out the contract-signing pen is when 
your prospect’s head starts bobbing up and down like a plastic 
duck. They’re silently screaming, “Yes, I’ll buy!” Unskilled sales¬ 
people just keep on talking until they finish the pitch they learned 
in training. Many keep talking so long, they unsell themselves. 
Conversely, when customers move their heads back and forth, no 
matter what they are saying, they mean “No!” 


Eyeballing Is Not for Selling Only 

Without a word, your friends and loved ones also show their 
wishes. When my friend Deborah became engaged to Tony, it 
seemed obvious to everyone—except Deborah—that it was not a 
marriage made in heaven. A few months before their wedding I 
said, “Deb, are you really sure Tony’s the one for you?” 

“Oh yes,” she said, her head moving right and left, back and 
forth, “I love him very much.” That marriage never took place. 
Her body recognized what her mind hadn’t yet realized. 

Like a politician, think of your social conversations as sales 
pitches. Even if you have no product, you want them to buy your 
ideas. If your listener turns away while you’re talking, don’t con- 



Hoiv to Make the Sale with Your Eyeballs 291 


centrate on how rude the person is. Like a sales pro, ask yourself, 
“How can I change the subject to turn this person on?” If their 
whole body starts to turn away, use the time-honored personal 
question ploy. Ask about their favorite topic. “George, how big did 
you say that bass you caught last week was?” Or use his name and 
ask a personal question. That’s always a grabber. “Archibald, what 
did you say the name of your high school football team was?” 

We’ve talked about only a few responses. Hints for reading 
someone’s body language could fill a book. In fact, they have— 
many of them. I suggest a few of my favorites in the references . 21-16 
Read up on body language and tune in to its visual channel when¬ 
ever you’re trying to sell to people, get their vote, or convince them 
you’re the best candidate for the job or the role of life partner. 




ECHNIQUE #77 

Eyeball Selling 


The human body is a twenty-four-hour broadcasting 
station that transmits “You thrill me.” “You bore me.” 

“I love that aspect of your product.” “That one puts my 
feet to sleep.” 

Set the hidden cameras behind your eyeballs to pick 
up on all your customers’ and friends’ signals. Then 
plan your pitch and your pace accordingly. 


Wouldn’t it be super to have Jimmi’s success rate with our listeners 
accepting whatever we say? We can if we just keep our eyes open. 


A Quick Review 

That’s all there is to it. You’ll remember to eat before coming to 
the party (the Munching or Mingling technique) to leave your 



2&lt;)2 How to Talk to Anyone 


hands free for heavy networking. When you arrive, you’ll stop in 
the doorway and Rubberneck the Room to get the lay of the land. 
While rubbernecking, you’ll Be the Chooser, Not the Choosee and 
pick your prospects for the evening. When standing around, you 
will be relaxing and inviting with Come-Hither Hands. 

You haven’t forgotten, of course, to use the meeting-people 
techniques from previous chapters. If you spot someone you want 
to talk to, check them out for a Whatzit you can comment on. 
Finding none, just ask the party giver, Whoozat? If the host or 
hostess is not in sight, simply stand near your target and resort to 
the Eavesdrop In technique. 

While chatting with anyone you’ve previously met, you will, 
of course, use Tracking to win their vote or heart and all the tech¬ 
niques in Part Two to ensure the conversation is interesting for 
your new acquaintance. Finally, you’ll employ Eyeball Selling to 
make sure you’re on target with every conversation. And don’t for¬ 
get, as you say “so long,” to scribble material for your next contact 
on your Business Card Dossier. 

It’s a good feeling when you’ve done it all right. Continue 
using these techniques politicians use to work a room, and you’ll 
suffer no more unimportant parties. And, following the advice 
throughout the book, you’ll never strike anyone as an unimpor¬ 
tant person. 

Now we move on to the advanced section of How to Talk to 
Anyone. Some of the following techniques may make you scratch 
your head in confusion. Pay special attention to the ones that do 
because it means somewhere, sometime, you might find yourself 
scratching your head over something much more painful—like the 
bump from hitting a glass ceiling, or why the business deal, friend¬ 
ship, or love affair went sour. You might never know, unless you 
read it here, that it was your own communications fumble. 



PART NINE 

How to Break the 
Most Treacherous 
Glass Ceiling of All 

Sometimes People Are Tigers 

Every week, when I was a kid, my mother took me to the National 
Geographic Society to see a film. The one on tigers invades my 
nightmares these many years later. Sitting there in the darkened 
theater, I watched a mother give birth to three tiny cubs. One was 
born with a mangled leg. I witnessed how all the other tiger cubs 
excluded him. And right there in front of the cameras, he was tor¬ 
tured to death by the others. I remember crying and thinking how 
the healthy cubs were like a few of the kids in my school. Some¬ 
times they could be very cruel. 

My best friend in grade school was Stella and she was a beau¬ 
tiful girl inside and out. But she had a speech defect, a cleft palate. 
And many of our classmates laughed at her behind her back and 
excluded her from their games. 

Kids haven’t changed much. When I give talks for colleges and 
young people’s groups, the discussion often turns to popularity. 
Everyone wants to be liked. Occasionally students tell me stories 

293 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



2&lt;&gt;4 How to Talk to Anyone 


about how some girl has a minor physical defect, say, a crossed eye 
or a nervous twitch. They say some kids laugh and make fun of 
her. Or a boy has a limp so no one chooses him for their baseball 
team. Even if he can run just as fast as the other kids, some of his 
classmates don’t like the image of “a cripple” being on their side. 

The years go by and kids become adults. Not too much 
changes. Adults are not as cruel, happily, about physical disabili¬ 
ties. But they can be brutal about social disabilities. Social dis¬ 
abilities are insidious because often we don’t recognize them in 
ourselves. We can be blind to our social handicaps and deaf to our 
verbal deficiencies. But we’re quick to recognize them in others. 

How many times has one of your associates made a dumb, 
insensitive gaffe? How often have you written somebody off 
because of some stupid move? Do you think he knew what he was 
doing? Of course not. He had no idea he was crossing a line or 
stepping on your toes. Probably no one ever told him about the 
subtleties we’re going to discuss in this final section of How to Talk 
to Anyone. 

We’ve all heard about the glass ceiling some companies con¬ 
struct over women and minorities. People seldom discuss another 
kind of glass ceiling. This one is even more treacherous because 
you can’t legislate against it and only top communicators recog¬ 
nize it. Yet it’s a rock-hard shield. Many bright individuals hit their 
heads on the thick glass as they try to climb up the next rung of 
the ladder to join the big boys and big girls on top. The folks able 
to crash through are the ones who abide by the unspoken rules 
that follow. 

Consider each of the following techniques. If you find any of 
them obvious, give yourself a pat on the back. It means you’re 
already a tiger on that one. Be on the lookout for those commu¬ 
nications sensitivities where you find yourself saying, “You gotta 
be kidding! What’s wrong with that?” 

Watch out! It means someday, somewhere, you might commit 
that particular insensitivity. Then, when a big winner responds 



How to Break the Most Treacherous Glass Ceiling of All 295 


coolly to your suggestion, doesn’t return your phone call, doesn’t 
give you the promotion, doesn’t invite you to the party, doesn’t 
accept your date, you’ll never know what happened. Read each of 
the following techniques to ensure you’re not making any of these 
subtle mistakes, that let the big players lacerate you and keep you 
from getting what you want in life. 



78 How to Win Their 
Affection by 
Overlooking Their 
Bloopers 


One remarkable reaction opened my eyes to yet another differ¬ 
ence between big winners and little losers. Several years ago I was 
doing a project for a client. I had the pleasure of being taken to 
lunch by the four biggest fish in the firm. They wanted to famil¬ 
iarize me with communications problems their company was 
experiencing. 

We went to a busy midtown restaurant at peak lunchtime. 
Every table was filled with a variety of corporate creatures. Upper- 
and middle-management types were lunching in their suits and 
ties or high-collar blouses. Workers and secretaries were munch¬ 
ing in their blue shirts or short skirts. The restaurant was buzzing 
with conversation and conviviality. 

Over the entree, we were in deep discussion about the com¬ 
pany’s challenges. The CFO, Mr. Wilson, was talking about the 
financial outlook when suddenly, BLAM! Not six feet away, a 
waiter dropped a tray full of dishes. Glasses broke, silverware clat¬ 
tered against the marble floor, and a hot baked potato rolled under 
our table in a direct path for Wilsons feet. 

2p6 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Win Their Affection by Overlooking Their Bloopers 2gy 


Practically everyone in the restaurant turned toward the 
humiliated waiter. We heard a cacophony of “Uh-oh,” “But¬ 
terfingers!” “Whoops, watch it!” “Boy, that’s his last lunch here,” 
and a variety of tittering and derisive laughter. 

Wilson, however, didn’t miss a word of his monologue. Not 
one big player at my table turned or blinked an eye. It was as 
though nothing had happened. The restaurant gradually quieted 
down around us as we continued our deliberations. (A few min¬ 
utes later the baked potato shot back out from under our table. At 
that moment, I found myself wondering whether Wilson had been 
a soccer player in his youth.) 

Over coffee, the director of marketing, Ms. Dawson, was dis¬ 
cussing the company’s planned expansion. Suddenly she made an 
expansive gesture with her arms that knocked over her coffee cup. 
Just as I was about to say, “Oh dear,” I bit my tongue. Before I 
could grab my napkin to help, Dawson was dabbing the muddy 
puddle with hers, and not missing a syllable of her soliloquy. None 
of her cool colleagues at the table even seemed to notice the over¬ 
turned cup. 

At that instant, I realized big boys and big girls see no bloop¬ 
ers, hear no bloopers. They never say “Butterfingers” or “Whoops” 
or even “Uh-oh.” They ignore their colleagues’ boners. They sim¬ 
ply don’t notice their comrades’ minor spills, slips, fumbles, and 
blunders. Thus, the technique “See No Bloopers, Hear No Bloop¬ 
ers” was born. 


Let Me Suffer in Your Silence 

I have one friend who every time I sneeze says, “Oh, are you com¬ 
ing down with a cold?” Every time I miss a step on a curb, it’s “Be 
careful!” Every time he sees me after a long day’s work he asks, 
“Are you tired?” Granted, this is small fry in the great bouillabaisse 
of bloopers. And the poor guy probably genuinely thinks he’s 



2p8 How to Talk to Anyone 


being sensitive to my needs. But, darn it, coming down with a 
cold, missing the curb, and looking tired are less than cool. Let 
me suffer—in YOUR silence. 

If you’re having dinner with a friend and she makes a boner, 
be blind to her overturned glass. Be deaf to her sneeze, cough, 
or hiccups. No matter how well-meaning your “gesundheit,” 
“whoops,” or knowing smile, nobody likes to be reminded of their 
own human frailty. 

“Fine,” you say, “for small slips, but what should one do in 
extreme circumstances?” Say a rippling tide of soda is flooding 
across the table in your direction and it will be impossible to ignore 
by the time it reaches your lap. 

If possible, deftly flip your napkin to obstruct the current and 
keep talking. Try not to miss a syllable of the sentence you started 
before the oncoming tide. At this point, your companion might 
mutter incoherent apologies. Adroitly weave a parenthetical “It’s 
nothing” into your current phrase and continue talking. On such 
small sands the castles of big cat camaraderie are built. 

Technique #78 

See No Bloopers, Hear No Bloopers 

Cool communicators allow their friends, associates, 
acquaintances, and loved ones the pleasurable myth of 
being above commonplace bloopers and embarrassing 
biological functions. They simply don’t notice their 
comrades’ minor spills, slips, fumbles, and faux pas. 

They obviously ignore raspberries and all other signs of 
human frailty in their fellow mortals. Big winners never 
gape at another’s gaffes. 



How to Win Their Affection by Overlooking Their Bloopers 299 


If people hate to be reminded of the moments when they’re 
not shining, there is another event almost as disillusioning. It is 
when a talker is shining and the spotlight abruptly pivots to a more 
urgent matter. The speaker is forgotten in the flurry. 

Top communicators put the glow back in the gloomy gabber s 
eyes with the technique that follows. 



79 How to Win Their 
Heart When Their 
Tongue Is Faltering 


In ancient Japan, if you saved someone’s life, it was their self- 
imposed task to spend the rest of their life serving you. Nowadays, 
if you rescue someone’s story, a molecule of that ancient instinct 
still gushes through his or her veins. 

It happens all the time. Someone in a group is telling a story 
and, just before their big point, BOOM! There’s an interruption. 
Someone new joins the group, a catering person with a tray of 
crackers and cheese comes over, or a baby starts crying. Suddenly 
everyone’s attention turns to the new arrival, the nibbles on the 
tray, or the “adorable” little tyke. Nobody is aware of the inter¬ 
ruption—except the speaker. They forget all about the fact that 
the speaker hasn’t made his or her point. 

Or you’re all sitting around the living room and someone is 
telling a joke. Suddenly, just before their big punch line, little 
Johnny drops a dish or the phone rings. After the crash, everyone 
talks about little Johnny’s clumsiness. After the call, the subject 
turns to the impending marriage or medical operation of the caller. 
Nobody remembers the great punch line got aborted—except the 
joke teller. (When it’s you regaling everyone at a restaurant, have 


300 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Win Their Heart When Their Tongue Is Faltering }0i 


you ever noticed how you can almost set your clock by the waiter 
coming to take everyone’s order just before your hilarious punch 
line?) 

Most joke and story tellers are too timid to say, after the inva¬ 
sion, “Now, as I was saying . . Instead, they’ll spend the rest of 
the evening feeling miserable they didn’t get to finish. Here’s where 
you come in. Rescue them with the technique I call “Lend a Help¬ 
ing Tongue.” 

Watch the gratitude in the storyteller’s eyes as he stabilizes 
where his story sunk and he sails off again toward the center of 
attention. His expression and the recognition of your sensitivity by 
the rest of the group are often reward enough. You are even more 
fortunate if you can rescue the story of someone who can hire you, 
promote you, buy from you, or otherwise lift your life. Big winners 
have elephantine memories. When you do them subtle favors like 
Lend a Helping Tongue, they find a way to pay you back. 




ECHNIQUE #79 

Lend a Helping Tongue 


Whenever someone’s story is aborted, let the interrup¬ 
tion play itself out. Give everyone time to dote on the 
little darling, give their dinner order, or pick up the 
jagged pieces of china. 

Then, when the group reassembles, simply say to the 
person who suffered story-interruptus, “Now please get 
back to your story.” Or better yet, remember where they 
were and then ask, “So what happened after the . . .” 
(and fill in the last few words). 



502 How to Talk to Anyone 


Harvey Mackay, the world’s most notable networker who rose 
from envelope salesman to corporate CEO and one of Americas 
most sought-after business and motivational speakers, teaches us 
that the world goes ’round on favors. How right he is! The next 
three techniques reveal unspoken subtleties of this critical balance 
of power. 



How to Let ’Em 
Know “What’s In It” 
for Them 


Savvy businesspeople know everyone is constantly tuned to the 
same radio station—WIIFM. Whenever anyone says anything, the 
listener’s instinctive reaction is “what’s in it for me?” Sales pros 
have elevated this constant query to the exalted status of acronym, 
WIIFM. They pay such strict attention to the WIIFM principle 
that they don’t open their pitch with the features of their product 
or service. Top pros start by highlighting the benefits to the buyer. 

Except for tactical reasons during sensitive negotiating, big 
winners lay both “what’s in it for me?” and “what’s in it for you?” 
(WIIFY) right out on the table. This is so critical that, if one cam¬ 
ouflages WIIFM or WIIFY, the concealer is relegated to the sta¬ 
tus of little loser. 

I once invited a casual acquaintance to lunch. I had hoped to 
consult with Sam, the head of a marketing association, on my 
speaking business. I told him my desire and jokingly asked if an 
hour of his valuable time was available in return for lunch at a great 
restaurant. That was my way of saying, “Look Sam, I know there’s 
no real benefit to you except a tasty lunch and the dubious plea¬ 
sure of my company.” (In other words, I was revealing WIIFY.) 
To make the meeting even more convenient for him, I said, “Sam, 
choose the date and the best restaurant in your neighborhood.” 

303 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



304 How to Talk to Anyone 


The day of our lunch consultation rolled around and I trav¬ 
eled forty-five minutes across town to his chosen restaurant. As I 
entered, I was surprised to see an assortment of people arranged 
around the largest table in the room with Sam as the smiling cen¬ 
terpiece. Obviously, this was not the setting in which I could con¬ 
sult with him. Unfortunately, Sam had already spotted me by the 
coat check. I was trapped. 

It wasn’t until after-lunch coffee arrived that I realized why 
Sam had assembled the group. He wanted each to donate presen¬ 
tations on their particular expertise to his organization. The sly 
fox hadn’t revealed his own “what’s in it for me?” 

Had Sam been a straight shooter and big player, he would 
have told me on the phone, “Leil, I’m getting a group of speakers 
who might be helpful to my organization together for a Dutch- 
treat lunch. I will, of course, try to answer your questions about 
your speaking business, but we will be a group of ten. Would you 
like to join us, or shall we choose another date when we can have 
more privacy?” 

I would gladly have spoken pro bono for Sam’s group had he 
been up-front about it. Instead, by not revealing WIIFM, we both 
lost. I lost a half day and, because of his trickiness, he lost my free 
speech for his group. 

Don’t Deny Them the Pleasure 
of Helping You 

Big winners also lay their cards on the table when asking someone 
for a favor. Many well-meaning folks are embarrassed to say how 
important the favor is to them. So they ask as though it’s a casual 
inquiry when it’s not. 

A friend of mine named Stefan once asked me if I knew any 
bands his organization could hire for their annual event. I told him 
“No, I’m sorry. I really don’t.” But Stefan didn’t let it go at that. 
He pressed, “Leil, didn’t you once work with bands on ships?” 



How to Let ’Em Know “What’s In It”for Them 505 


I told him “Yes, but I no longer have contact with them.” I 
thought that was the end of it. But Stefan didn’t. He grilled me 
further and I found myself getting confused and irritated. Finally 
I said, “Stefan, who’s in charge of getting the band?” 

He sheepishly said, “I am.” 

“Criminy jicketts, Stefan, why didn’t you tell me it was your 
responsibility? In that case, let me do some research and see if I 
can find a good one for you.” I was happy to do my friend a favor. 
But Stefan, by not telling me how important it was to him, risked 
not getting help. He also went down a notch or two in his friend’s 
esteem by not revealing WIIFM. 

When asking someone for a favor, let them know how much 
it means to you. You come across as a straight shooter, and the joy 
of helping you out is often reward enough. Don’t deny them that 
pleasure! 




ECHNIQUE #80 

Bare the Buried WIIFM (and WIIFY) 


Whenever you suggest a meeting or ask a favor, divulge 
the respective benefits. Reveal what’s in it for you and 
what’s in it for the other person—even if it’s zip. If any 
hidden agenda comes up later, you get labeled a sly fox. 


Asking or granting favors is a fabric that holds together only 
when woven with utmost sensitivity. Let us explore more ways to 
stitch this delicate cloth so your relationship doesn’t rip. 



8 i How to Make Them 
Want to Do Favors 
for You 


One of my clients, Susan Evans, heads up a large real estate firm. 
Once, sitting in her office discussing an upcoming project, her sec¬ 
retary buzzed. “Excuse me, Ms. Evans, it’s your brother-in-law 
Harry on the phone.” 

“Oh, of course,” she smiled, “put him on.” My client, mak¬ 
ing apologies for the interruption, picked up the phone. I left the 
room for a few moments to give her privacy. 

When I returned, Susan was just hanging up, saying, “Sure, 
have him phone me.” She told me the call was from her brother- 
in-law whose young cousin worked in a gas station but was inter¬ 
ested in a career in real estate. “The young man is going to call 
me and I’ll see if I can help him out.” It was obvious she was happy 
to do her brother-in-law a favor. We picked up our discussion 
where we left off. 

Not four minutes later, the secretary buzzed again. “Ms. 
Evans, a Sonny Laker is on the line. He says he’s your brother-in- 
law Harry’s cousin and he’s supposed to call you.” My client was 
taken aback. I could tell from her expression she was saying to her¬ 
self, “Boy, my overanxious brother-in-law didn’t waste any time, 
did he?” It seemed obvious to both of us what had happened. Like 




Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Make Them Want to Do Favors for You 307 


greased lightning, Harry must have hot-breathedly called Cousin 
Sonny to give him the big headline: Evans Would See Him! Then, 
by dialing Ms. Evans immediately, Sonny made it seem the big- 
deal interview was the most important event in his otherwise dull 
and dismal life. 

True or not, one verity remained—Little Cousin was insensi¬ 
tive to an unspoken rule big winners always obey: don’t jump 
immediately when someone is doing you a favor. Allow the per¬ 
son granting the favor time to savor the pleasure of agreeing to it, 
before having to pay up. 

Both brother-in-law and potential employee slipped in Evans’s 
estimate, all because of timing. To ensure the kid wouldn’t call his 
real-estate-mogul sister-in-law too quickly, Harry should have 
waited a day before telling his cousin the good news. Also, young 
Sonny should have asked Cousin Harry about Evans’s schedule. 
Sometimes an immediate call is advantageous but not when some¬ 
one is granting you a favor. 

yK 

Technique #8i 

Let ’Em Savor the Favor 

Whenever a friend agrees to a favor, allow your 

generous buddy time to relish the joy of his or her 

beneficence before you make them pay the piper. 

How long? At least twenty-four hours. 


One might think Evans was unfair judging Sonny harshly just 
because he didn’t let her savor the favor. It runs deeper than that. 
Evans’s subconscious thought process goes something like this: “If 
this kid is insensitive to the subtleties of timing when getting a 



308 How to Talk to Anyone 


job, how sensitive is he going to be when negotiating the sale of a 
house?” One agent’s overanxious call to an owner can mean thou¬ 
sands lost in commissions for the firm. 

Big winners have supernatural vision into your future. They 
see every communications blunder you make as a visible blotch on 
your x-ray. It dims your prognosis for being successful in life. 

Let’s look at yet another tenuous thread between favor asker 
and favor grantor that must not be severed lest the relationship 
unravel. 



82 How to Ask for Favors 
(and Get Them!) 


I once asked a well-connected friend who works in a top Los 
Angeles talent agency if she knew any celebrities I could contact 
for a project I was working on. Tania flipped though her Rolodex 
and came up with just the names I needed. It was obvious to both 
of us, I owed her big time. 

When I thanked her profusely on the phone, Tania said, “Oh 
I’m sure you’ll find a way to pay me back.” 

“Well, of course I will,” I said. “That goes without saying.” 
And well it should have gone without saying. She was reminding 
me the favor wasn’t out of friendship, but because she expected 
something in return. 

Two days later, Tania called and said she was coming to New 
York in a few months. She was just checking now if I could put 
her up then. Naturally I could, but blatantly cashing in on the 
return favor so quickly was not a smooth move. When someone 
does something nice for you, you find yourself with an elephant’s 
memory. In fact, you consciously look for ways to return the favor. 
Had Tania called, even years later, of course I would have remem¬ 
bered “I owed her one.” Frankly, I was glad it came up so quickly 
so I could even the score. Nevertheless, I do wish the whole barter 
aspect had been left unspoken. It tarnished what should have been 

309 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



3io How to Talk to Anyone 


a generous sharing on both sides. Tarnish always wears off on the 
tarnisher. 

When you do someone a favor and they obviously “owe you 
one,” wait a few weeks. Don’t make it look like tit for tat. Allow 
the favor asker the pleasurable myth that you joyfully did the favor 
with no thought of what you’re going to get in return. They know 
that’s not true. You know that’s not true. But only little losers make 
it obvious. 


Zb 


ECHNIQUE #82 

Tit for (Wait ... Wait) Tat 


When you do someone a favor and it’s obvious that “he 
owes you one,” wait a suitable amount of time before 
asking him to “pay.” Let him enjoy the fact (or fiction) 
that you did it out of friendship. Don’t call in your tit 
for their tat too swiftly. 


The next three techniques also involve timing, not of favors, 
but of important discussions. 



83 


How to Know What 
Not to Say at Parties 


When police were hot on the tail of a thief in ancient times, he’d 
frantically seek a church to duck into. The crook knew if he could 
get to an altar, the frustrated posse could not arrest him until he 
came out. 

When a pack of wolves in the jungle is in hot pursuit of a 
jackrabbit, the frightened bunny’s eyes seek a hollow log. He 
knows the wolves can’t devour him until he emerges. 

Likewise in the human jungle, big cats have certain safe havens. 
Although unspoken, they are as secure as the tenth-century altar 
or a hole in the log. At clearly understood times and places, even 
the toughest tiger knows he must not attack. I call these “safe 
havens.” 

I have a friend, Kirstin, the president of an advertising agency 
who each year invites me to her company’s Christmas party. One 
year, the holiday spirit was in extra-high swing. Conviviality was 
high and champagne flowed freely. It was a terrific bash. 

The evening wore on, more bubbly flowed, and the decibel 
level of the holiday revelers went up and up. So high, in fact, that 
Kirstin told me she was going to tiptoe out the back door and 
offered to drop me off at my place. 


3 IJ 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



jx2 How to Talk to Anyone 


As we were making our way toward the exit, we heard a woozy 
voice in the crowd, “Oh Kirrr-stin, Kirrr-stin!” A mail-room 
worker, warped with too much seasonal spirit, wobbled up to her 
boss and said, “You know, thish ish a great party, a grr-reat party. 
But I been doin’ some figuring. If half what it cost went into a 
child-care facility for the seven, count ’em, seven mothers with 
preschool children who work here ...” 

Kirstin, a top communicator, took Jane’s hands in hers and 
gave her a big smile. She said, “Jane, you’re obviously excellent at 
math. You’re right, just about half of what this party cost would 
indeed pay for the opening of such a facility. Let’s talk about it 
during business hours.” We then made a swift departure. 

On the way back to my place, she let out a big breath and said, 
“Whew, I’m glad that’s over.” 

“Didn’t you enjoy the party, Kirstin?” I asked. 

“Well, sure,” she said, “But you never know what’s going to 
happen. For instance,” she said, “that remark Jane made.” She 
went on to explain management had already had several meetings 
about opening a child-care facility for employees. In fact, plans 
for turning an unused storage area into a beautiful nursery were 
already in the works. Naively, I asked Kirstin why she hadn’t men¬ 
tioned that to Jane. 

“It wasn’t the right time or place.” Kirstin had handled the sit¬ 
uation at the party the way any big winner would—no spoken 
confrontation now (but probable silent condemnation later). 

Jane, unfortunately, had broken the first unspoken safe-haven 
rule, “Parties Are for Pratter.” Did Kirstin chastise Jane? Did she 
punish her inappropriate behavior? Not then, of course. Never¬ 
theless, Jane would probably feel the repercussions a few months 
down the pike when it came to promotion time. But by then poor 
Jane wouldn’t even know why she was passed over. 

Will it be because of a one-time overimbibing? Jane might 
grumble, “Yes.” Jane is wrong. It’s simply that big players can’t take 



How to Know What Not to Say at Parties 313 


the chance that one of their key people will feel too much holiday 
spirit at another party and next time confront an important client. 


4 


ECHNIQUE #83 

Parties Are for Pratter 


There are three sacred safe havens in the human jungle 
where even the toughest tiger knows he must not 
attack. The first of these is parties. 

Parties are for pleasantries and good fellowship, not 
for confrontations. Big players, even when standing 
next to their enemies at the buffet table, smile and nod. 
They leave tough talk for tougher settings. 


Lets move to the second safe haven where big cats can escape 
the claws of bigger cats and, they hope, the growls of lesser ones. 




How to Know What 
Not to Say at Dinner 


Did you ever wonder why business lunches between big bosses go 
on interminably long, sometimes well into the afternoon? Did you 
ever suspect it’s just because they like to sit, drink, and massage 
each other on the company expense account? Perhaps there’s an 
element of that. But the main reason is because the dining table 
is an even more sacred safe haven than a party. Big boys and big 
girls realize, whether it’s a business dinner, lunch, or breakfast, 
breaking bread together is a time when they must discuss no 
unpleasant aspects of the business. After all, tough negotiating can 
kill your appetite. 

Let’s listen in on an average business lunch between big play¬ 
ers. We hear the clanking of glasses as they consume drinks over 
convivial conversation. They are discussing golf, the weather, and 
making general observations about the state of the business. Dur¬ 
ing the main course, the discourse turns to food, the arts, current 
affairs, and other nonthreatening subjects. 

“Wasted time?” one might ask. Not at all! The big players are 
watching each other’s moves very carefully, calculating each other’s 
skills, knowledge, prowess. Like NFL scouts observing college 
football practice, they’re determining who’s got the right stuff. Big 


3H 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Know What Not to Say at Dinner 315 


players know how people handle themselves at a social occasion is 
an accurate barometer of their big-business muscle. As they are 
smiling and laughing at each other’s jokes, they are all making 
silent critical judgments. 

Finally, coffee arrives. At this point one or more of the biggies 
gently broaches the business at hand. Naturally, he or she does it 
with supposed reluctance, trying to repress the obvious relief that 
at last they can get down to significant stuff. He exudes, “What a 
shame such genial company should have to concern itself with 
mundane matters like making money.” 

Only after they have played out this crucial charade can they 
discuss business. But no dirty business. The biggies can brainstorm 
over coffee. They can discuss proposals over dessert. They can toss 
around new ideas over cordials. They can explore the positive side 
of the merger, the acquisition, or the partnership while waiting for 
the check. 

However, should any disagreement, misunderstanding, or 
controversial aspect arise, they must immediately relegate it to 
another table, the conference table. 


-1 


ECHNIQUE #84 

Dinner’s for Dining 


The most guarded safe haven respected by big winners 
is the dining table. Breaking bread together is a time 
when they bring up no unpleasant matters. While 
eating, they know it’s OK to brainstorm and discuss the 
positive side of the business: their dreams, their desires, 
their designs. They can free associate and come up with 
new ideas. But no tough business. 



316 How to Talk to Anyone 


This convention probably arose out of a prudent agreement 
not to inflict indigestion on each other. Tough negotiating is 
unpalatable and can ruin an otherwise perfectly mouthwatering 
veal chop. 

Incidentally, the same rule applies in the social jungle. If one 
partner in a friendship or a love relationship has some heavy rela¬ 
tionship issues to discuss, save them for after dessert. Even if you 
don’t solve the problem, you want to enjoy the delicious chocolate 
souffle. 

Let’s crawl into our third and final safe haven to explore it. 



8 s How to Know What 
Not to Say in a 
Chance Meeting 


William, who sells widgets, has been trying to get Big Winner on 
the phone for weeks to see if B.W.’s company will buy his line of 
widgets. Big Winner is still considering Willie’s widgets and plans 
eventually to return his call. However, at this point in our story, 
our little hero’s phone has not rung. 

It just so happens, one evening Willie finds himself standing 
behind Big Winner in the supermarket line. 

“What good fortune!” thinks Willie. 

“Oh hell!” thinks Big Winner. “I hope he’s not going to hit 
me with talk of his widgets at this hour.” 

Those who appreciate safe havens know there are two very 
different endings to this story. The Willie who brings up widgets 
with an “Aha, I’ve got you now” gleam in his eye, never gets his 
call returned. Even if Big Winner preferred Willie’s widgets above 
all others, he would find the supermarket entrapment sufficiently 
painful to punish the little loser. 

However, the Willie who just says “Hello there, B.W. How 
good to see you,” with nary a word of widgets, shows he’s a big 
player, too. This Willie will most certainly get his call returned— 
probably the next day—out of Big Winner’s relief and gratitude 
for Willie’s graciousness. 


3i7 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



jrf How to Talk to Anyone 


Zb 


ECHNIQUE #85 

Chance Encounters Are for Chitchat 


If you’re selling, negotiating, or in any sensitive 
communication with someone, do NOT capitalize on a 
chance meeting. Keep the melody of your mistaken 
meeting sweet and light. Otherwise, it could turn into 
your swan song with Big Winner. 


Consistently create safe havens for people if you want them 
to elevate you to the status of big winner. You may find yourself 
dining with them, going to parties with them, getting big “hellos” 
in the hall, and closing deals much faster than during business 
hours. Who knows? If it’s your desire, you even make yourself eli¬ 
gible for some heavy socializing at the top. Big winners make it 
safe for each other to accept invitations to play golf, spend the 
weekend in their country homes, or relax by each other’s pools. 
They know there will be no sharks swimming in the water, no 
razor blades buried in the shrimp cocktail. 



86 How to Prepare Them 
to Listen to You 


Once night, several years ago on a New York City street, I caught 
a man trying to break into a car. I shouted for him to stop. Instead 
of being content escaping, the burly would-be burglar decided to 
retaliate. As he raced past me, he shoved me down onto the 
cement and I cracked my skull against the curb. 

Dizzily, I wobbled into the emergency room of a nearby hos¬ 
pital. Holding an ice pack against my throbbing head, I was grilled 
by the emergency room triage nurse on my address, telephone, and 
social security numbers, insurance carrier, policy number, ad nau¬ 
seam. It’s as if she had said,’’The heck with your cracked skull. You 
can tell me about that later. What’s your insurance number?” 

Don’t bother me with that minutiae! All I wanted to do was 
tell somebody, anybody, what happened to me. It wasn’t until the 
very end of her ruthless and sadistic interrogation that she asked, 
“So what happened?” 

I later told my sad story to a friend, Sue, a nurse who works 
in admitting in another emergency room. She said, “I know. I can’t 
believe they print the forms that way. Injured people don’t get to 
tell what happened to them until the last line of the form. Sue said 
getting crucial numerical details from people suffering in the ER 
with broken bones and burns was a real challenge. Until, she said, 

3i9 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



J20 How to Talk to Anyone 


she switched her questioning around. She’d first ask them what 
happened. They’d tell her all about it. She’d listen sympathetically. 
“Then,” she said, “they were only too happy to give me the infor¬ 
mation I needed.” 

Good bosses understand this human need to talk. Robert, a 
colleague of mine who owns a small manufacturing firm, says 
whenever one of his employees complains about a problem, he 
never holds the griper’s feet to the fire for facts first. He hears the 
employee out completely. He lets him carry on about the cantan¬ 
kerous customer, the uncooperative coworker. “Then, after he’s 
gotten it off his chest,” Robert says, “I get the facts a lot more 
clearly.” 

When You Have Important Information 
to Impart 

Any kid working in a garage knows you can’t pump more gas into 
a full tank. Too much topping it off, and it splashes onto the cement. 
Likewise, your listener’s brain is always full of his or her own 
thoughts, worries, and enthusiasms. If you pump your ideas into 
your listener’s brain, which is full of her own notions, you’ll get a 
polluted mixture, then a spill. If you want your supersupreme ideas 
to flow into her tank unpolluted, drain her tank completely first. 


Zh 


ECHNIQUE #86 

Empty Their Tanks 


If you need information, let people have their entire say 
first. Wait patiently until their needle is on empty and 
the last drop drips out and splashes on the cement. It’s 
the only way to be sure their tank is empty enough of 
their own inner noise to start receiving your ideas. 



How to Prepare Them to Listen to You 321 


Whenever you are discussing emotionally charged matters, let 
the speaker finish completely before you jump in. Count to ten if 
you must. It will seem like an eternity, but letting the flustered fel¬ 
low finish is the only way he’ll hear you when it’s your turn. 

“I’m Going to Make You Miserable Before 
You Can Enjoy Being My Customer” 

Companies that run mail-order operations could take a hint from 
this technique. One reason I enjoy ordering from L.L. Bean, a 
mail-order clothing and sports-equipment outfit, is they let me ask 
questions about the wearable or widget I want first. They let me 
ramble on with my questions about the quality, the available col¬ 
ors, how it looks, how it feels, how it smells, and how it works. 
Then, when I’m all whacked up about receiving my four size-ten, 
red-and-chartreuse, soft, odorless widgets, they tastefully ask my 
credit card number. 

Other companies have first grilled me on the number, the 
expiration date, my customer number (which I can never find on 
the back of the catalogue), and how often I’ve ordered from them 
in the past before I even get to fantasize about the wonderful 
widget I might want to buy from them. Takes all the joy out of 
the purchase and sometimes kills the sale. 

Top communicators do more than just let you babble on. 
They use the next technique while you’re in the process of drib¬ 
bling down. 



#f&gt; How to lurn Their 
Anger Around (in Three 
Sentences or Less) 


Emo is a word invented by Helen Gurley Brown, the grand dame 
of Cosmopolitan magazine. Emo translated is “Give more emotion!” 
Once Cosmopolitan asked me to write an article on communicat¬ 
ing sensitive matters (most specifically advising young women on 
how to make their boyfriends more passionate). I interviewed a 
passel of psychologists, communications experts, and sexologists. 
My draft came back from Cosmo all marked up with “MORE 
EMO” scribbled on every page. 

I called my editor and asked what it meant. She said that was 
Helen’s way of saying downplay all that factual stuff with the sex 
therapists and so-called experts. Write about the emotion the young 
woman feels when her boyfriend isn’t passionate enough, the emo¬ 
tion the accused male feels when confronted, and the emotion the 
couple feels about discussing their quandary. Helen Gurley Brown, 
a certified big winner, liked to have it all and knew just how to get 
it. Helen recognized, when the time is right, reject the rational and 
empathize with the emotions. In other words, smear on the emo. 

“Oh, No! He Must Have Been Mortified!” 

L.L. Bean recently smeared emo all over me. Several months ago, 
my friend Phil wanted to buy some trousers and asked for a rec- 

522 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Turn Their Anger Around (in Three Sentences or Less) 52j 


ommendation. I dragged him to my closet to show him the qual¬ 
ity and construction of the L.L. Bean clothes. That convinced 
him, and Phil ordered a pair of navy-blue dress trousers. 

Phil wore his brand new L.L. Bean pants for the first time on 
a big date with a new girlfriend at an elegant restaurant. While 
following the maitre d’ to the cozy corner booth which he’d 
requested, his date happened to drop her evening bag. Phil 
promptly bent over to pick it up. Riiiiiiip! Right down the mid¬ 
dle seam. 

Most of the diners facing Phil’s derriere mercifully looked 
away. A few tittered. Phil, tugging the torn seams together to blan¬ 
ket his buns, backed his way into the booth. The cool upholstery 
on his bottom the rest of the evening reminded him of his 
humiliation. 

When I heard of Phil’s tribulations, I was furious at L.L. Bean. 
I immediately called one of their customer service agents. She sym¬ 
pathized as I told her of Phil’s ordeal, but I was still simmering. 
She patiently listened and even asked me details of the disaster. 
When I finished the long sad story, the agent said, “Oh that’s ter¬ 
rible. I understand, your friend must have felt awful.” 

“Yes, he did,” I agreed. 

“He must have been mortified!” she said. 

“He definitely was,” I said, surprised at her excellent grasp of 
the situation. 

“And you, when you heard about it. You must have felt terri¬ 
ble, too, especially after you’d recommended our products so 
highly.” 

“Well, your products usually are excellent,” I said, calming 
down a bit. 

“I’m so sorry we caused you this pain and aggravation,” she 

said. 

“Oh,” I interrupted. “It’s not your fault.” Now I was com¬ 
pletely appeased. “It must have just been a fluke that this one pair 
of pants was ...” 




324 How to Talk to Anyone 


2ji 


ECHNIQUE # 8 7 

Echo the Emo 


Facts speak. Emotions shout. Whenever you need facts 
from people about an emotional situation, let them 
emote. Hear their facts but empathize like mad with 
their emotions. Smearing on the emo is often the only 
way to calm their emotional storm. 


There’s more to this story, but let me pause here to interject 
the Echo the Emo technique. 

The clever customer service rep not only emptied my tanks 
and softened me up with Echo the Emo. She completely dissolved 
me with the next technique. 



88 How to Make’Em Like 
You (Even When You’ve 
Messed Up) 


The next day, UPS delivered not only the replacement slacks, but 
tucked into the package was a handwritten apology and a hefty 
gift certificate. Would I order from that company again? You bet 
I would. Would I recommend their clothes to someone else? You 
bet I would. Top customer service folks welcome mistakes because 
they know it gives their firm a chance to shine. Whenever you 
mess up and someone suffers because of it, make sure they come 
out ahead, way ahead. I call the technique “My Goof, Your Gain.” 

Visiting an important client’s office, I once tripped on a rug 
and took a nose dive, making a three-point landing in a vase on 
her desk. My nose was spared but her vase shattered into 
smithereens. Two tubes of crazy glue and lots of “Where the heck 
does this piece go” later, the vase was back on her desk, and we 
agreed it looked pretty good. Nevertheless, the next day I had a 
messenger deliver a beautiful vase, ten times the value of the 
almost-totaled one, with a dozen roses in it. 

Whenever we speak, my client tells me every time she looks 
at the new vase, she smiles. (A better “incentive gift” than a pen 
with your name on it, no?) The next time I visit her office, my 
client may hide some of her more valuable breakables. But, thanks 
to My Goof, Your Gain, there will be a next time. 

325 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



326 How to Talk to Anyone 


Zh 


ECHNIQUE #88 

My Goof, Your Gain 


Whenever you make a boner, make sure your victim 
benefits. It’s not enough to correct your mistake. Ask 
yourself, “What could I do for this suffering soul so he 
or she will be delighted I made the flub?” Then do it, 
fast! In that way, your goof will become your gain. 


Now, suppose it’s not your boo-boo. It’s theirs. How can you 
make their goof your gain? Read on. 




How to Trap a Rat 
with Gass 


In Japan, some citizens prefer to lose their lives rather than to lose 
face. In America, the same death wish exists, with one modifica¬ 
tion. The Yank dreams of the death of the mortal who made him 
lose face. 

Why make enemies? Unless it is your obligation to catch 
cheaters or entrap liars, let them get away with it. Then immedi¬ 
ately get them out of your life and the lives you’re responsible for. 
Even when the case is open and shut against someone—when 
you’ve got the rat fink trapped—leave him an escape hatch. 

The best example I heard of this high sensitivity was from one 
of my clients. She was invited to brunch at the home of a wealthy 
socialite known as “Lady Stephanie.” Lady Stephanie’s home was 
filled with beautiful objets d’art. Not the least among them was 
an exquisite collection of extremely valuable Eaberge eggs, which 
all the guests admired. 

At the end of the elegant champagne brunch, my client told 
me she was walking out the door chatting with several other 
guests. Just then, Lady Stephanie sidled up to one woman leaving 
at the same time as my client. “Oh, I’m so happy you were admir¬ 
ing my Eaberge collection,” Lady Stephanie said, sliding her hand 
into the pocket of the guest’s mink coat and plucking out one of 

527 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



328 How to Talk to Anyone 


her priceless eggs. “You must have wanted to see this one in the 
sunlight. Come, let us look at it together. It does reflect the bright 
light beautifully.” 

The mink-clad thief gulped and furtively looked around to 
see who had witnessed her gentle entrapment. My client and 
everyone in the foyer saw what happened, but took Lady 
Stephanie’s lead and pretended naivete of the attempted heist. 

Carrying the charade a step further, Lady Stephanie and the 
sticky-fingered guest “admired the egg in the sunlight.” Then Lady 
Stephanie, with her Faberge egg secured safely between her per¬ 
fectly manicured fingers, marched home to put the treasure in its 
rightful place. The attempted egg snatcher crawled back to her car, 
from her last attendance at Lady Stephanie’s coveted bashes. The 
hostess let the foiled filcher get away with a few slivered shreds of 
her ego left intact. 

Why did Lady Stephanie come out ahead? Everyone who wit¬ 
nessed—and subsequently heard about—the thwarted burglary 
has renewed respect for Lady Stephanie. Snaring the thief, yet 
sparing her pride, helped Lady Stephanie keep her reputation of 
“hostess with the mostest.” 

Why do big winners let bad-news people get away with bum¬ 
mers? Because, like mothers confronting naughty children to cor¬ 
rect them, confronting creeps is a way of saying “I care.” By 
closing your mouth (and then the door forever), you are saying, 
“You are so beneath me I’m not going to even waste my words on 
you.” 

“Mea Culpa!” 

Big winners leave an escape hatch for the small foibles of friends 
they wish to keep by taking the blame themselves. If a friend gets 
lost and is an hour late arriving at your house, tell her “Those 
directions I gave you were terrible.” He breaks your Limoges bowl? 
“Oh I shouldn’t have left it in such a precarious position.” It’s the 



How to Trap a Rat with Class 329 


old mea culpa routine that endears you to everyone, especially 
when they realize it wasn’t your fault. 




ECHNIQUE #89 

Leave an Escape Hatch 


Whenever you catch someone lying, filching, exagger¬ 
ating, distorting, or deceiving, don’t confront the dirty 
duck directly. Unless it is your responsibility to catch or 
correct the culprit—or unless you are saving other 
innocent victims by doing so—let the transgressor out 
of your trap with his tricky puss in one piece. Then 
resolve never to gaze upon it again. 


Residents of Toronto, Canada, have a well-earned reputation 
for grace. They demonstrated it last year in a downtown Toronto 
drugstore. A shopper attempted to stroll out through the security 
system with a purloined object in his pocket. Instead of a shrill 
alarm shattering all shoppers’ eardrums, as in many American 
cities, a tasteful little chime sounded. A charming voice came 
across the public address. “Excuse us, we have failed to inactivate 
the inventory control system. Thank you for your patience while 
you wait for a customer care representative to come help you.” Isn’t 
that a nicer way of saying “Freeze, punk, while we come frisk 
your 

Now let’s move on to the next technique to keep people from 
messing up—and to help them give you their very best. 



90 How to Get Whatever 
You Want from Service 
Personnel 


A complimentary letter is called a “buttercup” because it butters 
up the recipient. Buttercups are nice. Even nicer are buttercups 
about someone to their boss. 

I once needed a massive photocopying job. It was so immense 
that the assistant manager of Staples office-supply store didn’t 
think it could be finished by the end of the week. Nevertheless, 
grudgingly, he grumbled, “I’ll try.” In my enthusiasm and hope he 
could, I gushed, “Wow, you’re great! What’s your boss’s name? 
Your supervisor should get a letter of congratulations on hiring 
you. You really try harder for your customers.” To my astonish¬ 
ment, not only was my printing job done two days early, but every 
time I walk into Staples, the assistant manager rolls out the red 
carpet. 

“Hmm,” I began to think. “I may be on to something.” A pre¬ 
mature letter of commendation for favors not yet received could 
be a clever tactic. I decided to check it out with a few heavy hit¬ 
ters on my consultation list. 

One fellow I know, Tim, a top travel agent, is a real can-do 
guy. He gets anything his friends ask for in a finger snap. He’s the 
fellow to call when you want hard-to-get theater tickets. He’s the 


330 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Get Whatever You Want from Service Personnel 331 


guy you call when your airline says the hotel is booked or the flight 
is oversold. 

When I told him of my buttercup experience, Tim laughed 
and said, “Led, of course. This is news to you? A complimentary 
letter to someone’s boss—or the promise of one—is a great insur¬ 
ance policy. It’s as good as a written rider that you will be well 
taken care of in the future.” 

Now I have a standard one in my computer. The buttercup 
reads as follows: 

Dear [name of supervisor], 

I know how important customer service is to an 
organization such as yours. This letter is to com¬ 
mend [name of employee]. He/She is an example of 
an [employee title] who gives exceptional customer 
service. [Name of store or business] continues to 
have my business thanks in great part to the service 
given by [name of employee]. 

Gratefully, [signature] 

I’ve sent this letter to supervisors of parking lots, owners of 
insurance companies, and to managers of dozens of stores where 
I shop regularly. I’m sure that’s why I never need to worry about 
getting a parking place when the lot is full, an immediate callback 
from my insurance agent, and attentive service at my regular shop¬ 
ping haunts. 

But be careful! Don’t just ask, “What’s the name of your 
supervisor?” Hearing those words can make an employee as nerv¬ 
ous as a turkey in November. Be sure to couch it in a compliment. 
Say something like, “Wow, you are terrific. What’s your supervi¬ 
sor’s name? I’d like to write him or her a letter.” Then write it! 
You’ll forever be a VIP in his or her book. 



How to Talk to Anyone 


Zb 


EECHNIQUE #90 

Buttercups for Their Boss 


Do you have a store clerk, accountant, law firm junior 
partner, tailor, auto mechanic, maitre d’, massage 
therapist, kid’s teacher—or any other worker you want 
special attention from in the future? The surefire way 
to make them care enough to give you their very best is 
send a buttercup to their boss. 


The next technique tells you how to stand out as a VIP when 
you’re in a group. 



91 How to Be a Leader 
in a Crowd, Not a 
Follower 


During the McCarthy era, government spies infiltrated under¬ 
ground political rallies to determine who was “dangerous to 
national security.” The agents were trained applause watchers. 
They photographed and investigated men who clapped first, 
shouted “Bravo” the loudest, and smiled the longest at the end of 
politically inflammatory speeches. The spies dubbed those the 
“dangerous ones.” The infiltrators felt first responders were confi¬ 
dent cats who had the power to persuade followers and the 
charisma to lead crowds. 

In less politically sensitive gatherings, the same principle 
applies. People who respond first to a presentation or happening, 
without looking around to see how everyone else is reacting, are 
men and women of leadership caliber. 


Cool Cats Clap First 

You are sitting in an auditorium with hundreds of fellow employ¬ 
ees listening to the president of your firm introduce a new con¬ 
cept. As you’re slouching anonymously in the audience, you think 
your expression is invisible to the man or woman at the podium. 
Not so! As a speaker, I guarantee you every one of my colleagues 

did 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



334 How to Talk to Anyone 


sees every smile, every frown, every light in every eye, and every 
emblem of extraordinary human intelligence flashing back at him 
or her. 

Likewise, the company president making a presentation anx¬ 
iously surveys his corporate jungle and, from the pusses peering 
back at him, senses which employees are sympathetic and which 
are not. He also knows which in the sea of faces floating in front 
of him has the potential to be a heavy hitter like himself. How? 

Because heavy hitters, even when they do not agree with the 
speaker, support the podium pontificator. Why? Because they 
know what it’s like to be on. They know, no matter how big or lit¬ 
tle the cat at the front of the room is, when giving a speech he’s 
concerned about the crowd’s acceptance. 


.'r. 


ECHNIQUE #91 

Lead the Listeners 


No matter how prominent the big cat behind the 
podium is, crouched inside is a little scaredy-cat who is 
anxious about the crowd’s acceptance. 

Big winners recognize you’re a fellow big winner 
when they see you leading their listeners in a positive 
reaction. Be th z first to applaud or publicly commend 
the man or woman you agree with (or want favors 
from). 


When the company big shot delivers his last line, carefully 
contrived to bring the crowd to its feet or employees to acquies¬ 
cence, do you think he’s unaware of who starts the trickle, or the 
riptide, of acceptance? No way! Though his head is down while 
taking a bow, with the insight of a McCarthy-era spy, he perceives 



How to Be a Leader in a Crowd, Not a Follower 33$ 


precisely who inaugurated the applause, precisely how long after 
the last words were uttered, and precisely how enthusiastically! 
Being the first to put your hands together, being the first to jump 
to your feet, and, if appropriate, being the first to shout “Bravo,” 
gets you big cat status with the tiger who was talking. 

Be the first clapper no matter how small the crowd, no mat¬ 
ter how informal the talk. Don’t wait to see how everyone else is 
going to respond. Even if it’s a small group of three or four peo¬ 
ple standing around, be the first to empathize with the speaker’s 
ideas, the first to mutter “good idea.” It’s proof positive you’re a 
person who trusts his or her own instincts. 




How to Make All 
the Right Moves 


Any minute, any second, football fans know the score. Even beer- 
guzzling Big George, dozing in front of the TV set on football 
Sunday knows. Poke his pudgy pot, and in a wink, he’ll tell you 
who’s winning, who’s losing, and by precisely how many points. 

Key players in the game of life are like George. Even when 
you think they’re dozing, they are constantly aware of the score 
between themselves and everyone in their life—friends and fam¬ 
ily included! They know who is winning, who is losing, and by 
how many points. 

When two Japanese businessmen meet, it’s obvious who is on 
top. You measure it in millimeters from how close to the floor their 
noses come when bowing. (Bottom man’s nose dives lower.) 

In America, we don’t have carefully choreographed bows 
showing the score in a relationship. But boys ’n’ girls in the busi¬ 
ness big league know who is top dog and who is bottom dog today. 
(It can change tomorrow.) 

Bottom dog must curtsy deeper. He or she must show defer¬ 
ence. Bottom dog must offer to meet at top dog’s office, pick up 
the restaurant tab when appropriate, and be respectful of top dog’s 
time. If bottom dog fails to show the proper deference, he doesn’t 

336 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Make All the Right Moves JJ7 


get his nose rubbed into the ground. He simply disqualifies him¬ 
self to bark in the big league. 

That’s what happened to my girlfriend Laura, who had devel¬ 
oped the healthy milkshake. (Remember her from Instant Replay?) 
When we last left Laura, she was blowing her chances with Fred, 
the top banana of a supermarket chain, by grilling him for details 
of his mailing address, complaining her pen was out of ink, mak¬ 
ing him wait while she got another, writing numbers down wrong, 
ad nauseam. 

I didn’t tell you the worst part. After Fred was generous 
enough to invite Laura to send him samples of her health shake, 
she dropped another bomb by asking him which shipping service 
she should use. He must have said FedEx because I heard Laura 
say, “Well, my milkshake needs to stay refrigerated. Does FedEx 
have refrigerated trucks?” 

At this point I knew she had strangled the deal by her own 
phone chord. She shouldn’t nudge Supermarket Czar with dinky 
shipping details. In fact, Laura should be so grateful, she should 
personally deliver the drink the next day—rolling it all the way to 
his supermarket with her nose if need be. Laura was obviously not 
aware of The Great Scorecard in the Sky. That day the tally was 
Fred everything, Laura nothing. 

Big winners—before putting pen to paper, fingers to key¬ 
board, mouth to phone, or hand to someone else’s to shake it— 
do a quick calculation. They ask themselves “Who has the most 
to benefit from this relationship? What has each of us done 
recently that demands deference from the other?” And what can 
I do to even the score? 


Friends Keep Tabs Too 

The Great Scorecard in the Sky is not just bobbing over busi¬ 
nesspeople. If family members and friends look carefully over their 



338 How to Talk to Anyone 


loved ones’ heads, they’ll spot it. And, like an over-the-counter 
stock, it goes up or down every day. When you mess up, you have 
to even your score by doing more for the one who didn’t. To keep 
love alive, keep your eye on The Great Scorecard in the Sky. 

Several months ago, I met a nice chap named Charles at a con¬ 
vention. We started discussing our favorite foods. His was home¬ 
made linguine with pesto sauce. I liked Charles and I make a mean 
pesto sauce. The remarkable coincidence of these two elements 
emboldened me to invite him to dinner at my place. “Great,” he 
said. We set it for seven-thirty the following Tuesday. 

Tuesday afternoon, I begin preparations for the big date. The 
cuckoo clock on the wall monitored my progress. At five cuckoos, 
I run to the store to find pine nuts. By six cuckoos, I’m back home 
grinding basil and garlic. At seven cuckoos, I’m folding napkins, 
setting the table, pulling out fresh candles. Whoops, running late. 
I change clothes and spruce myself up. When seven-thirty strikes, 
I am all ready. The pesto and I await his arrival. 

Eight o’clock rolls around and no friend. Well, I figure, I’ll 
open the wine and let it breathe. Another hour passes and no 
Charles. The cuckoo calls me “cuckoo” nine times now. I begin to 
believe the bird. It is evident Charles isn’t coming. I have been 
stood up. 

The next day Charles called with halfhearted apologies and a 
semiplausible excuse. His car broke down. “Gee, I’m sorry,” I said. 
(I wanted to say, “Did Martians capture you? Were you trans¬ 
ported to another planet where there were no phones to call me?” 
I resisted the sarcasm.) However, he did sound contrite so I was 
almost willing to forget it. Until his next question. 

He obviously wasn’t aware of how he’d slipped in The Great 
Scorecard in the Sky because, instead of inviting me for linguine 
with pesto at a fine Italian restaurant to make up for his blooper, 
he asked, “When can we reschedule at your house?” 

Never, Charlie. 



How to Make All the Right Moves 339 




ECHNIQUE #92 

The Great Scorecard in the Sky 


Any two people have an invisible scorecard hovering 
above their heads. The numbers continually fluctuate, 
but one rule remains: player with lower score pays 
deference to player with higher score. The penalty for 
not keeping your eye on The Great Scorecard in the 
Sky is to be thrown out of the game. Permanently. 


Your Destiny 

We’ve met many people in How to Talk to Anyone. A few of their 
names are changed, but each is very real. Recently, I decided to 
track down some of the folks with whom I’d crossed paths over 
the years. I wanted to see what they’re up to now. 

Laura, my old friend who dreamed of milkshake millions but 
ignored the Supermarket Czar’s scorecard, is now back at her day 
job. Sam, who ruffled me by not revealing he wanted me to speak 
for his organization, no longer has one. Sonny, who hounded his 
brother-in-law’s cousin by a too-quick call, is still pumping gas. 
Tania, who insisted on immediate tit for tat, no longer has that 
terrific job at the talent agency. Poor Jane, the mail-room clerk who 
confronted her boss at the Christmas party five years ago, is still 
wrapping packages. And Dan, who left the prolonged inspirational 
message on his phone, now has an unlisted number—not a good 
sign for an aspiring speaker. 

Whereas Barry who asks everyone he calls, “What Color Is 
Your Time?” was recently chosen Broadcaster of the Year by the 
National Association of Talk Show Hosts. Joe, who keeps note of 
everyone on his Business Card Dossier, is now a state senator. 



540 How to Talk to Anyone 


Jimmi, the expert at Eyeball Selling, was recently written up in 
Success magazine. Steve, whose staff insinuates “Oh Wow, It’s You!” 
to every caller, is one of the most requested speakers on the cable 
circuit. Tim, the can-do guy who gets what he wants from work¬ 
ers in every industry by writing Buttercups for Their Boss, now 
owns the travel agency. And Gloria, my hairdresser who gives the 
great Nutshell Resume, recently opened a salon on New York’s 
fashionable Fifth Avenue. 

Does this mean to say that just because the first folks irked 
me and a few others they were exiled to a humdrum existence? 
And the latter group who made people smile would attain great 
heights? Of course not. Those isolated moments of their lives we 
examined were but one move of many they made each day. 

But consider: if you had been who was ruffled by Laura, Sam, 
Sonny, Tania, Jane, or Dan and they called you, would you feel 
like extending yourself for them? Probably not. The memory of 
their ragged dealing would still smart. 

Whereas if you heard from Barry, Joe, Jimmi, Steve, Tim, or 
Gloria, happy memories of your exchange would flood over you. 
You’d want to do whatever you could for them. 

Multiply your response by many thousands. As we said in the 
introduction, nobody gets to the top alone. Over the years, the 
smooth moves of these big winners have captured the hearts and 
conquered the minds of hundreds of people who helped boost 
them rung by rung to the top of whatever ladder they chose. 

How does one become an instinctive smooth mover rather 
than a ragged rider through life? The answer became blindingly 
clear one snowy day last winter. Lumbering along a neatly 
groomed track on cross-country skis, I spotted a Nordic skier 
swiftly striding toward me in the same trail. I didn’t need to 
observe his high kick or his snazzy diagonal poling to let me know 
I was obstructing the path of a pro. 



How to Make All the Right Moves 341 


While mustering the energy to lug my throbbing legs out of 
the track so Super Skier could soar past, he deftly sidestepped out 
of the groove, leaving the groomed trail all for me. As he whizzed 
toward me, he slowed slightly, smiled, nodded, and said, “Good 
morning, beautiful day for skiing, isn’t it?” 

I appreciated his deference (and insinuation that we were 
equals on the snow!). I knew he was not thinking “Hey look at 
me. Here I am!” but “Ahh, there you are. Let me make room for 
you.” 

As I implied in the opening words of this book, the differ¬ 
ence in the life success between those two types of thinkers is 
incalculable. 

Why was Super Skier able to pull off his move so gracefully? 
Was he born with the skill? No. His was a deliberate move that 
grew out of practice. 

Practice is also the fountainhead of all smooth communica¬ 
tions moves. Excellence is not a single and solitary action. It is the 
outcome of many years of making small smooth moves, tiny ones 
like the ninety-two little tricks we’ve explored in How to Talk to 
Anyone. These moves create your destiny. 

Remember, repeating an action makes a habit. 

Your habits create your character. 

And your character is your destiny. 

May success be your destiny. 



This page intentionally left blank. 



Notes 


1. Ekman, Paul. 1985. Telling Lies: Clues to Deceit in the Mar¬ 
ketplace, Politics, and Marriage. New York: W. W. Norton Co., Inc. 

2. Cheng, Sha, et al. 1990. “Effects of Personality Type on 
Stress Response.” Acta-Psychologica-Sinica 22(2):i97-204. 

3. Carnegie, Dale. 1936. How to Win Friends and Influence Peo¬ 
ple. New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. 

4. Goleman, Daniel. 1989. “Brain’s Design Emerges as a Key 
to Emotions,” quoting Dr. Joseph LeDoux, psychologist at Cen¬ 
ter for Neural Science at New York University. New York Times, 
August 15. 

5. Kellerman, Joan, et al. 1989. “Looking and Loving: The 
Effects of Mutual Gaze on Feelings of Romantic Love.” Con¬ 
ducted at the Agoraphobia Treatment &amp; Research Center of New 
England. Journal of Research in Personality 23 (2): 145-161. 

6. Argyle, Michael. 1967. The Psychology of Interpersonal 
Behavior. Baltimore: Pelican Publications. 

7. Wellens, A. Rodney. 1987. “Heart-Rate Changes in Re¬ 
sponse to Shifts in Interpersonal Gaze from Liked and Disliked 
Others.” Perceptual and Motor Skills 64(2): 595-598. 

8. Ibid. 


343 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



344 Notes 


9. Zig Ziglar, motivational teacher and author of the best¬ 
selling books See You at the Top, Secrets of Closing the Sale, Over 
the Top, and Something to Smile About. 

10. Curtis, Rebecca C., and Miller, Kim. 1986. “Believing 
Another Likes or Dislikes You: Behaviors Making the Beliefs Come 
Tru c.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 5i(2):284-290. 

11. Hayakawa, S. I. 1941. Language in Thought and Action. 
New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. 

12. Aronson, E., et al. 1966. “The Effect of a Pratfall on 
Increasing Interpersonal Attractiveness.” Psychonomic Science 
4:227-228. 

13. Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching 
and Carnegie Institute of Technology studies in the 1930s show¬ 
ing that 85 percent of one’s financial success, even in technical 
fields such as engineering, is due to communications skills. 

14. U.S. Census Bureau of Hiring, Training, and Manage¬ 
ment Practices conducted a survey of 3,000 employers nation¬ 
wide. The preferred qualities in job candidates were, rated in order 
of importance, attitude, communications skills, previous work 
experience, recommendations from current employer, recom¬ 
mendations from previous employer, industry-based credentials, 
years of schooling completed, score on interview tests, academic 
performance (grades), reputation of applicant’s school, teacher 
recommendations. 

15. Walsh, Debra G., and Hewitt, Jay. 1985. “Giving Men the 
Come-On: Effect of Eye Contact and Smiling in a Bar Environ¬ 
ment.” Perceptual and Motor Skills 61(3, Part 1): 873-874. 

16. Walters, Lilly. 1995. What to Say When You’re Dying on the 
Platform. New York: McGraw-Hill. 

17. Axtell, Roger. 1994. Do’s and Taboos Around the World. New 
York: John Wiley &amp; Sons, Inc. 

18. Bosrock, Mary. 1997. Put Your Best Foot Forward series. 
Minneapolis: International Education Systems. 



Notes 345 


19. Nwanna, Gladson. 1998. Do’s and Don’ts Around the 
World series. Baltimore: World Travel Institute. 

20. Byrne, Donn, et al. 1970. “Continuity Between the Exper¬ 
imental Study of Attraction and Real-Life Computer Dating.” 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 1:157-165. 

21. Fast, Julius. 1970. Body Language. New York: Simon &amp; 
Schuster. 

22. Fast, Julius. 1991. Subtext: Making Body Language Work in 
the Workplace. New York: Viking. 

23. Lewis, David. 1989. The Secret Language of Success. New 
York: Carroll &amp; Graf Publishers, Inc. 

24. Nierenberg, Gerard, and Caliero, Fdenry. 1993. How to 
Read a Person Like a Book. New York: Barnes &amp; Noble Books. 

25. Pease, Allan. 1981. Signals: How to Use Body Language for 
Power, Success and Love. New York: Bantam Books. 

26. Sannito, Thomas, and McGovern, Peter J., 1985. Court¬ 
room Psychology for Trial Lawyers. New York: John Wiley &amp; Sons, 
Inc. 



This page intentionally left blank. 



About the Author 


Leil Lowndes is an internationally acclaimed communications 
expert who coaches top executives of Fortune 500 companies as 
well as frontline employees to become more effective communi¬ 
cators. She has spoken in pratically every major U.S. city and con¬ 
ducts communications seminars for the U.S. Peace Corps, foreign 
governments, and major corporations. In addition to engrossing 
audiences on hundreds of TV and radio shows, her work has been 
acclaimed by the New York Times, the Chicago Tribune, and Time 
magazine. Her articles have appeared in professional journals and 
popular publications such as Redbook, New Woman, Psychology 
Today, Penthouse, and Cosmopolitan. Based in New York City, she 
is the author of many books including the topselling How to Make 
Anyone Fall in Love with You and How to Be a People Magnet. 

If you come across any communications techniques, send 
them to Leil—so she can share them with others. She would love 
to hear from you. Her E-mail address is leil@peoplemagnet.com. 

Would you like more communications techniques from Leil? 
Sign up for her complimentary monthly communications hint. 
Go to lowndes.com and click on “Subscribe.” 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



</pre>
L EIL LOWNDES 



Little 
Tricks 
for Big Success in 
Relationships 






The McGraw-Hill Companies 


Copyright © 2003 by Leil Lowndes. All rights reserved. Manufactured in the United States of America. 
Except as permitted under the United States Copyright Act of 1976, no part of this publication may be 
reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, with¬ 
out the prior written permission of the publisher. 

0-07-143334-1 

The material in this eBook also appears in the print version of this title: 0-07-141858-X 


All trademarks are trademarks of their respective owners. Rather than put a trademark symbol after 
every occurrence of a trademarked name, we use names in an editorial fashion only, and to the benefit 
of the trademark owner, with no intention of infringement of the trademark. Where such designations 
appear in this book, they have been printed with initial caps. 

McGraw-Hill eBooks are available at special quantity discounts to use as premiums and sales pro¬ 
motions, or for use in corporate training programs. For more information, please contact George 
Hoare, Special Sales, at george_hoare@mcgraw-hill.com or (212) 904-4069. 

TERMS OF USE 

This is a copyrighted work and The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. (“McGraw-Hill”) and its licensors 
reserve all rights in and to the work. Use of this work is subject to these terms. Except as permitted 
under the Copyright Act of 1976 and the right to store and retrieve one copy of the work, you may not 
decompile, disassemble, reverse engineer, reproduce, modify, create derivative works based upon, 
transmit, distribute, disseminate, sell, publish or sublicense the work or any part of it without 
McGraw-Hill’s prior consent. You may use the work for your own noncommercial and personal use; 
any other use of the work is strictly prohibited. Your right to use the work may be terminated if you 
fail to comply with these terms. 

THE WORK IS PROVIDED “AS IS”. McGRAW-HILL AND ITS LICENSORS MAKE NO GUAR¬ 
ANTEES OR WARRANTIES AS TO THE ACCURACY, ADEQUACY OR COMPLETENESS OF 
OR RESULTS TO BE OBTAINED FROM USING THE WORK, INCLUDING ANY INFORMA¬ 
TION THAT CAN BE ACCESSED THROUGH THE WORK VIA HYPERLINK OR OTHERWISE, 
AND EXPRESSLY DISCLAIM ANY WARRANTY, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT 
NOT LIMITED TO IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A 
PARTICULAR PURPOSE. McGraw-Hill and its licensors do not warrant or guarantee that the func¬ 
tions contained in the work will meet your requirements or that its operation will be uninterrupted or 
error free. Neither McGraw-Hill nor its licensors shall be liable to you or anyone else for any inac¬ 
curacy, error or omission, regardless of cause, in the work or for any damages resulting therefrom. 
McGraw-Hill has no responsibility for the content of any information accessed through the work. 
Under no circumstances shall McGraw-Hill and/or its licensors be liable for any indirect, incidental, 
special, punitive, consequential or similar damages that result from the use of or inability to use the 
work, even if any of them has been advised of the possibility of such damages. This limitation of lia¬ 
bility shall apply to any claim or cause whatsoever whether such claim or cause arises in contract, tort 
or otherwise. 


DOI: 10.1036/0071433341 





Professional 



Want to learn more? 

We hope you enjoy this McGraw-Hill eBook! If you’d like 
more information about this book, its author, or related books 
and websites, please click here . 




There are two kinds of people in this life: 
Those who walk into a room and say, 
“Well, here I am!” 

And those who walk in and say, 

“Ahh, there you are.” 



This page intentionally left blank. 



For more information about this title, click here. 

Contents 


Introduction: How to Get Anything You Want 

from Anybody (Well, at Least Have 
the Best Crack at It!). xi 

Part One: How to Intrigue Everyone Without 
Saying a Word: You Only Have Ten 
Seconds to Show You’re a Somebody. i 

1 How to Make Your Smile Magically Different.y 

2 How to Strike Everyone as Intelligent and 

Insightful by Using Your Eyes. p 

3 How to Use Your Eyes to Make Someone Fall in 

Love with You. 14 

4 How to Look Like a Big Winner Wherever You Go. . . . iy 

5 How to Win Their Heart by Responding to Their 

“Inner Infant”. 21 

6 How to Make Someone Feel Like an Old Friend 

at Once.27 

7 How to Come Across as 100 Percent Credible 

to Everyone. 31 

8 How to Read People Like You Have ESP.37 

9 How to Make Sure You Don’t Miss a Single Beat. jp 

v 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 












Part Two: How to Know What to Say After 

You Say “Hi”. 44 

10 How to Start Great Small Talk. 47 

11 How to Sound Like You’ve Got a Super 

Personality (No Matter What You’re Saying!). 41 

12 How to Make People Want to Start a 

Conversation with You. 46 

13 How to Meet the People You Want to Meet. 49 

14 How to Break into a Tight Crowd. 61 

15 How to Make “Where Are You From?” 

Sound Exciting. 64 

16 How to Come Out a Winner Every Time 

They Ask, “And What Do You Do?”. 68 

17 How to Introduce People Like the Host(ess) 

with the Most(est). 71 

18 How to Resuscitate a Dying Conversation.73 

19 How to Enthrall ’Em with Your Choice of 

Topic—Them!. 76 

20 How to Never Need to Wonder, “What Do I 

Say Next?”. 78 

21 How to Get ’Em Happily Chatting (So You Can 

Slip Away if You Want To!). 82 

22 How to Come Across as a Positive Person. 87 

23 How to Always Have Something Interesting 

to Say. 8p 

Part Three: How to Talk Like a VIP.73 

24 How to Find Out What They Do (Without Even 

Asking!). 74 

25 How to Know What to Say When They Ask, 

“What Do You Do?”. 98 

26 How to Sound Even Smarter Than You Are. 104 






















27 How to Not Sound Anxious (Let Them Discover 

Your Similarity). 107 

28 How to Be a “ J6«-Firstie” to Gain Their Respect 

and Affection. no 

29 How to Make Them Feel You “Don’t Smile at 

Just Anybody”. 117 

30 How to Avoid Sounding Like a Jerk. up 

31 How to Use Motivational Speakers’ Techniques to 

Enhance Your Conversation. 121 

32 How to Banter Like the Big Shots Do (Big 

Winners Tell It Like It Is). 127 

33 How to Avoid the World’s Worst Conversational 

Habit. I2p 

34 How to Give Them the Bad News (and Have 

Them Like You All the More). 131 

35 How to Respond When You Don’t Want to 

Answer (and Wish They’d Shut the Heck Up).734 

36 How to Talk to a Celebrity. 176 

37 How to Make Them Want to Thank You. 140 

Part Four: How to Be an Insider in Any Crowd: 

What Are They All Talking About? .... 144 

38 How to Be a Modern-Day Renaissance Man 

or Woman. 147 

39 How to Sound Like You Know All About Their 

Job or Hobby. 170 

40 How to Bare Their Hot Button (Elementary 

Doc-Talk). 174 

41 How to Secretly Learn About Their Lives. 177 

42 How to Talk When You’re in Other Countries. 161 

43 How to Talk Them into Getting the “Insider’s 

Price” (on Practically Anything You Buy) . . . . 167 





















Part Five: How to Sound Like You’re Peas in 

a Pod: “Why, We’re Just Alike!”. 171 

44 How to Make Them Feel You’re of the Same “Class” . J75 

45 How to Make Them Feel That You’re Like “Family”. . 176 

46 How to Really Make It Clear to Them. 182 

47 How to Make Them Feel You Empathize (Without 

Just Saying “Yep, Uh Huh, Yeah”). 186 

48 How to Make Them Think You See/Hear/Feel It 

Just the Way They Do. 188 

49 How to Make ’Em Think We (Instead of You 

vs. Me) . 192 

50 How to Create a Friendly “Private Joke” with Them . . 197 

Part Six: How to Differentiate the Power of 

Praise from the Folly of Flattery. 199 

51 How to Compliment Someone (Without Sounding 

Fike You’re Brownnosing). 202 

52 How to Be a “Carrier Pigeon” of Good Feelings .... 204 

53 How to Make ’Em Feel Your Admiration “Just 

Slipped Out”. 207 

54 How to Win Their Hearts by Being an “Undercover 

Complimenter”. 209 

55 How to Make ’Em Never Forget You with a “Killer 

Compliment”. 211 

56 How to Make ’Em Smile with “Itty-Bitty Boosters”. . 214 

57 How to Praise with Perfect Timing. 217 

58 How to Make ’Em Want to Compliment You . 220 

59 How to Make a Foved One Feel You Are THE 

Partner for Fife. 224 

Part Seven: How to Direct Dial Their Hearts .... 229 

60 How to Sound More Exciting on the Phone. 241 

61 How to Sound Close (Even if You’re Hundreds 

of Miles Away). 244 


















62 How to Make ’Em Happy They Called You.236 

6 3 How to Sneak Past the Gatekeeper. 240 

6 4 How to Get What You Want on the Phone from 

Big Shots. 242 

6 5 How to Get What You Want—by Timing!. 245 

66 How to Impress Everyone with Your Outgoing 

Voicemail Message. 248 

67 How to Get Them to Call You Back.272 

68 How to Make the Gatekeeper Think You’re 

Buddy-Buddy with the VIP.275 

69 How to Make Them Say You Have Super Sensitivity . 277 

70 How to “Listen Between the Lines” on the Phone . . . 277 


Part Eight: How to Work a Party Like a Politician 
Works a Room: The Politician’s Six- 


Point Party Checklist . 26 7 

71 How to Avoid the Most Common Party Blooper .... 270 

72 How to Make an Unforgettable Entrance.272 

73 How to Meet the People YOU Want to Meet.274 

74 How to Subliminally Lure People to You at 

a Gathering. 278 

75 How to Make ’Em Feel Like a Movie Star. 281 

76 How to Amaze Them with What You Remember 

About Them. 287 

77 How to Make the Sale with Your Eyeballs. 288 


Part Nine: How to Break the Most Treacherous 

Glass Ceiling of All: Sometimes People 


Are Tigers.273 

78 How to Win Their Affection by Overlooking 

Their Bloopers. 276 

79 How to Win Their Heart When Their Tongue 

Is Faltering. 700 

80 How to Let ’Em Know “What’s in It” for Them .... 303 




















81 How to Make Them Want to Do Favors for You .... 306 

82 How to Ask for Favors (and Get Them!). 30P 

83 How to Know What Not to Say at Parties. 311 

84 How to Know What Not to Say at Dinner. 314 

85 How to Know What Not to Say in a Chance 

Meeting. 31/ 

86 How to Prepare Them to Listen to You. 319 

87 How to Turn Their Anger Around (in Three 

Sentences or Less). 322 

88 How to Make ’Em Like You (Even When 

You’ve Messed Up). 329 

89 How to Trap a Rat with Class. 327 

90 How to Get Whatever You Want from Service 

Personnel. 330 

91 How to Be a Leader in a Crowd, Not a Follower .... 333 

92 How to Make All the Right Moves. 336 

Notes. 343 














Introduction 

How to Get Anything You Want 
from Anybody (Well, at Least 
Have the Best Crack at It!) 


Have you ever admired those successful people who seem to“have 
it all”? You see them chatting confidently at business meetings or 
comfortably at social parties. They’re the ones with the best jobs, 
the nicest spouses, the finest friends, the biggest bank accounts, or 
the most fashionable zip codes. 

But wait a minute! A lot of them aren’t smarter than you. 
They’re not more educated than you. They’re not even better look¬ 
ing! So what is it? (Some people suspect they inherited it. Others 
say they married it or were just plain lucky. Tell them to think 
again.) What it boils down to is their more skillful way of deal¬ 
ing with fellow human beings. 

You see, nobody gets to the top alone. Over the years, people 
who seem to “have it all” have captured the hearts and conquered 
the minds of hundreds of others who helped boost them, rung by 
rung, to the top of whatever corporate or social ladder they chose. 

Wanna-bes wandering around at the foot of the ladder often 
gaze up and grouse that the big boys and big girls at the top are 
snobs. When big players don’t give them their friendship, love, or 
business, they call them “cliquish” or accuse them of belonging to 
an “old-boy network.” Some grumble they hit their heads against 
a “glass ceiling.” 

The complaining Little Leaguers never realize the rejection 
was their own fault. They’ll never know they blew the affair, the 

xi 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



xii Introduction 


friendship, or the deal because of their own communications fum¬ 
bles. It’s as though well-liked people have a bag of tricks, a magic, 
or a Midas touch that turns everything they do into success. 

What’s in their bag of tricks? You’ll find a lot of things: a sub¬ 
stance that solidifies friendships, a wizardry that wins minds, and 
a magic that makes people fall in love with them. They also pos¬ 
sess a quality that makes bosses hire and then promote, a charac¬ 
teristic that keeps clients coming back, and an asset that makes 
customers buy from them and not the competition. We all have a 
few of those tricks in our bags, some more than others. Those with 
a whole lot of them are big winners in life. How to Talk to Anyone 
gives you ninety-two of these little tricks they use every day so 
you, too, can play the game to perfection and get whatever you 
want in life. 


How the “Little Tricks” Were Unveiled 

Many years ago, a drama teacher, exasperated at my bad acting in 
a college play, shouted, “No! No! Your body is belying your words. 
Every tiny movement, every body position,” he howled, “divulges 
your private thoughts. Your face can make seven thousand differ¬ 
ent expressions, and each exposes precisely who you are and what 
you are thinking at any particular moment.” Then he said some¬ 
thing I’ll never forget: “And your body! The way you move is your 
autobiography in motion.” 

How right he was! On the stage of real life, every physical 
move you make subliminally tells everyone in eyeshot the story of 
your life. Dogs hear sounds our ears can’t detect. Bats see shapes 
in the darkness that elude our eyes. And people make moves that 
are beneath human consciousness but have tremendous power to 
attract or repel. Every smile, every frown, every syllable you utter, 
or every arbitrary choice of word that passes between your lips can 
draw others toward you or make them want to run away. 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



Introduction xiii 


Men—did your gut feeling ever tell you to jump ship on a 
deal? Women—did your women’s intuition make you accept or 
reject an offer? On a conscious level, we may not be aware of what 
the hunch is. But like the ear of the dog or the eye of the bat, the 
elements that make up subliminal sentiments are very real. 

Imagine, please, two humans in a complex box wired with cir¬ 
cuits to record all the signals flowing between the two. As many 
as ten thousand units of information flow per second. “Probably 
the lifetime efforts of roughly half the adult population of the 
United States would be required to sort the units in one hour’s 
interaction between two subjects,” a University of Pennsylvania 
communications authority estimates. 1 

With the zillions of subtle actions and reactions zapping back 
and forth between two human beings, can we come up with con¬ 
crete techniques to make our every communication clear, confi¬ 
dent, credible, and charismatic? 

Determined to find the answer, I read practically every book 
written on communications skills, charisma, and chemistry 
between people. I explored hundreds of studies conducted around 
the world on what qualities made up leadership and credibility. 
Intrepid social scientists left no stone unturned in their quest to 
find the formula. For example, optimistic Chinese researchers, 
hoping charisma might be in the diet, went so far as to compare 
the relationship of personality type to the catecholamine level in 
subjects’ urine. 7 Needless to say, their thesis was soon shelved. 

Dale Carnegie Was GREAT for the 
Twentieth Century, but This Is the 
Twenty-First 

Most of the studies simply confirmed Dale Carnegie’s 1936 classic, 
How to Win Friends and Influence People.- His wisdom for the ages 
said success lay in smiling, showing interest in other people, and 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



xiv Introduction 


making them feel good about themselves. “That’s no surprise,” I 
thought. It’s as true today as it was more than sixty years ago. 

So if Dale Carnegie and hundreds of others since offer the 
same astute advice, why do we need another book telling us how 
to win friends and influence people? Two mammoth reasons. 

Reason One: Suppose a sage told you, “When in China, 
speak Chinese,” but gave you no language lessons? Dale Carnegie 
and many communications experts are like that sage. They tell us 
what to do but not how to do it. In today’s sophisticated world, 
it’s not enough to say “smile” or “give sincere compliments.” Cyn¬ 
ical businesspeople today see more subtleties in your smile, more 
complexities in your compliment. Accomplished or attractive peo¬ 
ple are surrounded by smiling sycophants feigning interest and 
fawning all over them. Prospects are tired of salespeople who say, 
“The suit looks great on you,” when their fingers are caressing cash 
register keys. Women are wary of suitors who say, “You are beau¬ 
tiful,” when the bedroom door is in view. 

Reason Two: The world is a very different place than it was 
in 1936, and we need a new formula for success. To find it, I 
observed the superstars of today. I explored techniques used by 
top salespeople to close the sale, speakers to convince, clergy to 
convert, performers to engross, sex symbols to seduce, and ath¬ 
letes to win. 

I found concrete building blocks to the elusive qualities that 
lead to their success. Then I broke them down into easily digestible, 
news-you-can-use techniques. I gave each a name that will quickly 
come to mind when you find yourself in a communications conun¬ 
drum. As I developed the techniques, I began sharing them with 
audiences around the country. Participants in my communications 
seminars gave me their ideas. My clients, many of them CEOs of 
Fortune 500 companies, enthusiastically offered their observations. 

When I was in the presence of the most successful and 
beloved leaders, I analyzed their body language and their facial 



Introduction xv 


expressions. I listened carefully to their casual conversations, their 
timing, and their choice of words. I watched as they dealt with 
their families, friends, associates, and adversaries. Every time I 
detected a little nip of magic in their communicating, I asked 
them to pluck it out with tweezers and expose it to the bright light 
of consciousness. We analyzed it together, and I then turned it 
into an easy-to-do “little trick” others could duplicate and profit 
from. 

My findings and the strokes of some of those very effective 
folks are in this book. Some are subtle. Some are surprising. But 
all are achievable. When you master them, everyone from new 
acquaintances to family, friends, and business associates will hap¬ 
pily open their hearts, homes, companies, and even wallets to give 
you whatever they can. 

There’s a bonus. As you sail through life with your new com¬ 
munications skills, you’ll look back and see some very happy givers 
smiling in your wake. 



This page intentionally left blank. 



PART ONE 

How to Intrigue 
Everyone Without 
Saying a Word 


You Only Have Ten Seconds to 
Show You’re a Somebody 


The exact moment that two humans lay eyes on each other has 
awesome potency. The first sight of you is a brilliant holograph. 
It burns its way into your new acquaintance’s eyes and can stay 
emblazoned in his or her memory forever. 

Artists are sometimes able to capture this quicksilver, fleeting 
emotional response. My friend Robert Grossman is an accom¬ 
plished caricature artist who draws regularly for Forbes, Newsweek, 
Sports Illustrated, Rolling Stone, and other popular publications. 
Bob has a unique gift for capturing not only the physical appear¬ 
ance of his subjects, but for zeroing in on the essence of their per¬ 
sonalities. The bodies and souls of hundreds of luminaries radiate 
from his sketch pad. One glance at his caricatures of famous peo¬ 
ple and you can actually “see” their personalities. 

i 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



2 How to Talk to Anyone 


Sometimes at a party, Bob will do a quick sketch on a cock¬ 
tail napkin of a guest. Hovering over Bob’s shoulder, the onlook¬ 
ers gasp as they watch their friend’s image and essence materialize 
before their eyes. When he’s finished drawing, he puts his pen 
down and hands the napkin to the subject. Often a puzzled look 
comes over the subject’s face. He or she usually mumbles some 
politeness like, “Well, er, that’s great. But it really isn’t me.” 

The crowd’s convincing crescendo of “Oh yes it is!” drowns 
the subject out and squelches any lingering doubt. The confused 
subject is left to stare back at the world’s view of himself or her¬ 
self in the napkin. 

Once when I was visiting Bob’s studio, I asked him how he 
could capture people’s personalities so well. He said, “It’s simple. 
I just look at them.” 

“No,” I asked, “How do you capture their personalities? Don’t 
you have to do a lot of research about their lifestyle, their history?” 

“No, I told you, Leil, I just look at them.” 

“Huh?” 

He went on to explain, “Almost every facet of people’s per¬ 
sonalities is evident from their appearance, their posture, the way 
they move. For instance ...” he said, calling me over to a file where 
he kept his caricatures of political figures. 

“See,” Bob said, pointing to angles on various presidential body 
parts, “here’s the boyishness of Clinton,” showing me his half smile; 
“the awkwardness of the elder George Bush,” pointing to his shoul¬ 
der angle; “the charm of Reagan,” noting the ex-president’s smiling 
eyes; “the shiftiness of Nixon,” pointing to the furtive tilt of his 
head. Digging a little deeper into his file, he pulled out Franklin 
Delano Roosevelt and, pointing to the nose high in the air, “Here’s 
the pride of FDR.” It’s all in the face and the body. 

First impressions are indelible. Why? Because in our fast- 
paced, information-overload world of multiple stimuli bombard¬ 
ing us every second, people’s heads are spinning. They must form 



How to Intrigue Everyone Without Saying a Word 3 


quick judgments to make sense of the world and get on with what 
they have to do. So, whenever people meet you, they take an 
instant mental snapshot. That image of you becomes the data they 
deal with for a very long time. 

Your Body Shrieks Before Your 
Lips Can Speak 

Are their data accurate? Amazingly enough, yes. Even before your 
lips part and the first syllable escapes, the essence of YOU has 
already axed its way into their brains. The way you look and the 
way you move is more than 80 percent of someone’s first impres¬ 
sion of you. Not one word need be spoken. 

I’ve lived and worked in countries where I didn’t speak the 
native language. Yet, without one understandable syllable spoken 
between us, the years proved my first impressions were on target. 
Whenever I met new colleagues, I could tell instantly how friendly 
they felt toward me, how confident they were, and approximately 
how much stature they had in the company. I could sense, just 
from seeing them move, who the heavyweights were and who were 
the welterweights. 

I have no extrasensory skill. You’d know, too. How? Because 
before you have had time to process a rational thought, you get a 
sixth sense about someone. Studies have shown emotional reac¬ 
tions occur even before the brain has had time to register what’s 
causing that reaction. 4 Thus the moment someone looks at you, 
he or she experiences a massive hit, the impact of which lays the 
groundwork for the entire relationship. Bob told me he captures 
that first hit in creating his caricatures. 

Deciding to pursue my own agenda for How to Talk to Any¬ 
one, I asked, “Bob, if you wanted to portray somebody really 
cool—you know, intelligent, strong, charismatic, principled, fas¬ 
cinating, caring, interested in other people. ...” 



4 How to Talk to Anyone 


“Easy,” Bob interrupted. He knew precisely what I was get¬ 
ting at. “Just give ’em great posture, a heads-up look, a confident 
smile, and a direct gaze.” It’s the ideal image for somebody who’s 
a Somebody. 


How to Look Like a Somebody 

My friend Karen is a highly respected professional in the home- 
furnishings business. Her husband is an equally big name in the 
communications field. They have two small sons. 

Whenever Karen is at a home-furnishings industry event, 
everyone pays deference to her. She’s a very important person in 
that world. Her colleagues at conventions jostle for position just 
to be seen casually chatting with her and, they hope, be pho¬ 
tographed rubbing elbows with her for industry bibles like Home 
Furnishings Executive and Furniture World. 

Yet, Karen complains, when she accompanies her husband to 
communications functions, she might as well be a nobody. When 
she takes her kids to school functions, she’s just another mom. She 
once asked me, “Leil, how can I stand out from the crowd so peo¬ 
ple who don’t know me will approach me and at least assume I’m 
an interesting person?” The techniques in this section accomplish 
precisely that. When you use the next nine techniques, you will 
come across as a special person to everyone you meet. You will 
stand out as a Somebody in whatever crowd you find yourself in, 
even if it’s not your crowd. 

Let’s start with your smile. 



i How to Make Your 
Smile Magically 
Different 


In 1936, one of Dale Carnegie’s six musts in How to Win Friends 
and Influence People was SMILE! His edict has been echoed each 
decade by practically every communications guru who ever put 
pen to paper or mouth to microphone. However, at the turn of 
the millennium, it’s high time we reexamine the role of the smile 
in high-level human relations. When you dig deeper into Dale’s 
dictum, you’ll find a 1936 quick smile doesn’t always work. Espe¬ 
cially nowadays. 

The old-fashioned instant grin carries no weight with today’s 
sophisticated crowd. Look at world leaders, negotiators, and cor¬ 
porate giants. Not a smiling sycophant among them. Key players 
in all walks of life enrich their smile so, when it does erupt, it has 
more potency and the world smiles with them. 

Researchers have catalogued dozens of different types of 
smiles. They range from the tight rubber band of a trapped liar to 
the soft squishy smile of a tickled infant. Some smiles are warm 
while others are cold. There are real smiles and fake smiles. (You’ve 
seen plenty of those plastered on the faces of friends who say they’re 
“delighted you decided to drop by,” and presidential candidates vis¬ 
iting your city who say they’re “thrilled to be in, uh . . . uh. . . .”) 


5 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



6 How to Talk to Anyone 


Big winners know their smile is one of their most powerful 
weapons, so they’ve fine-tuned it for maximum impact. 


How to Fine-Tune Your Smile 

Just last year, my old college friend Missy took over her family 
business, a Midwestern company supplying corrugated boxes to 
manufacturers. One day she called saying she was coming to New 
York to court new clients and she invited me to dinner with sev¬ 
eral of her prospects. I was looking forward to once again seeing 
my friend’s quicksilver smile and hearing her contagious laugh. 
Missy was an incurable giggler, and that was part of her charm. 

When her Dad passed away last year, she told me she was tak¬ 
ing over the business. I thought Missy’s personality was a little 
bubbly to be a CEO in a tough business. But, hey, what do I know 
about the corrugated box biz? 

She, three of her potential clients, and I met in the cocktail 
lounge of a midtown restaurant and, as we led them into the din¬ 
ing room, Missy whispered in my ear, “Please call me Melissa 
tonight.” 

“Of course,” I winked back, “not many company presidents 
are called Missy!” Soon after the maitre d’ seated us, I began notic¬ 
ing Melissa was a very different woman from the giggling girl I’d 
known in college. She was just as charming; she smiled as much 
as ever. Yet something was different. I couldn’t quite put my fin¬ 
ger on it. 

Although she was still effervescent, I had the distinct impres¬ 
sion everything Melissa said was more insightful and sincere. She 
was responding with genuine warmth to her prospective clients, 
and I could tell they liked her, too. I was thrilled because my 
friend was scoring a knockout that night. By the end of the eve¬ 
ning, Melissa had three big new clients. 



How to Make Your Smile Magically Different 7 


Afterward, alone with her in the cab, I said, “Missy, you’ve 
really come a long way since you took over the company. Your 
whole personality has developed, well, a really cool, sharp corpo¬ 
rate edge.” 

“Uh uh, only one thing has changed,” she said. 

“What’s that?” 

“My smile,” she said. 

“Your what?” I asked incredulously. 

“My smile,” she repeated as though I hadn’t heard her. “You 
see,” she said, with a distant look coming into her eyes, “when Dad 
got sick and knew in a few years I’d have to take over the business, 
he sat me down and had a life-changing conversation with me. I’ll 
never forget his words. Dad said, ‘Missy, Honey, remember that 
old song, “I Loves Ya, Honey, But Yer Feet’s Too Big”? Well, if 
you’re going to make it big in the box business, let me say, “I loves 
ya, Honey, but your smile’s too quick.” ’ 

“He then brought out a yellowed newspaper article quoting a 
study he’d been saving to show me when the time was right. It con¬ 
cerned women in business. The study showed women who were 
slower to smile in corporate life were perceived as more credible.” 

As Missy talked, I began to think about history-making 
women like Margaret Thatcher, Indira Gandhi, Golda Meir, 
Madeleine Albright, and other powerful women of their ilk. Not 
one was known for her quick smile. 

Missy continued, “The study went on to say a big, warm smile 
is an asset. But only when it comes a little slower, because then it 
has more credibility.” From that moment on, Missy explained, she 
gave clients and business associates her big smile. However, she 
trained her lips to erupt more slowly. Thus her smile appeared 
more sincere and personalized for the recipient. 

That was it! Missy’s slower smile gave her personality a richer, 
deeper, more sincere cachet. Though the delay was less than a sec- 



8 How to Talk to Anyone 


ond, the recipients of her beautiful big smile felt it was special and 
just for them. 

I decided to do more research on the smile. When you’re in 
the market for shoes, you begin to look at everyone’s feet. When 
you decide to change your hairstyle, you look at everyone’s hair¬ 
cut. Well, for several months, I became a steady smile watcher. I 
watched smiles on the street. I watched smiles on TV. I watched 
the smiles of politicians, the clergy, corporate giants, and world 
leaders. My findings? Amid the sea of flashing teeth and parting 
lips, I discovered the people perceived to have the most credibil¬ 
ity and integrity were just ever so slower to smile. Then, when they 
did, their smiles seemed to seep into every crevice of their faces 
and envelop them like a slow flood. Thus I call the following tech¬ 
nique “The Flooding Smile.” 


2 $ 


ECHNIQUE #1 

The Flooding Smile 


Don’t flash an immediate smile when you greet 
someone, as though anyone who walked into your line 
of sight would be the beneficiary. Instead, look at the 
other person’s face for a second. Pause. Soak in their 
persona. Then let a big, warm, responsive smile flood 
over your face and overflow into your eyes. It will 
engulf the recipient like a warm wave. The split-second 
delay convinces people your flooding smile is genuine 
and only for them. 


Let us now travel but a few inches north to two of the most 
powerful communications tools you possess, your eyes. 



-2 How to Strike Everyone as 
Intelligent and Insightful 
hy Using Your Eyes 


It’s only a slight exaggeration to say Helen of Troy could launch 
ships with her eyes and Davy Crockett could stare down a bear. 
Your eyes are personal grenades that have the power to detonate 
people’s emotions. Just as martial arts masters register their fists as 
lethal weapons, you can register your eyes as psychological lethal 
weapons when you master the following eye-contact techniques. 

Beloved people in the game of life look beyond the conven¬ 
tional wisdom that teaches “Keep good eye contact.” For one, they 
understand that to certain suspicious or insecure people, intense 
eye contact can be a virulent intrusion. 

When I was growing up, my family had a Haitian house¬ 
keeper whose fantasies were filled with witches, warlocks, and 
black magic. Zola refused to be left alone in a room with Louie, 
my Siamese cat. “Louie looks right through me—sees my soul,” 
she’d whisper to me fearfully. 

In some cultures, intense eye contact is sorcery. In others, star¬ 
ing at someone can be threatening or disrespectful. Realizing this, 
big players in the international scene prefer to pack a book on cul¬ 
tural body-language differences in their carry-on rather than a 
Berlitz phrase book. In our culture, however, big winners know 
exaggerated eye contact can be extremely advantageous, especially 


9 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



io How to Talk to Anyone 


between the sexes. In business, even when romance is not in the 
picture, strong eye contact packs a powerful wallop between men 
and women. 

A Boston center conducted a study to learn the precise effect . 5 
The researchers asked opposite-sex individuals to have a two- 
minute casual conversation. They tricked half their subjects into 
maintaining intense eye contact by directing them to count the 
number of times their partner blinked. They gave the other half 
of the subjects no special eye-contact directions for the chat. 

When they questioned the subjects afterward, the unsuspect¬ 
ing blinkers reported significantly higher feelings of respect and 
fondness for their colleagues who, unbeknownst to them, had sim¬ 
ply been counting their blinks. 

I’ve experienced the closeness intense eye contact engenders 
with a stranger firsthand. Once, when giving a seminar to several 
hundred people, one woman’s face in the crowd caught my atten¬ 
tion. The participant’s appearance was not particularly unique. Yet 
she became the focus of my attention throughout my talk. Why? 
Because not for one moment did she take her eyes off my face. 
Even when I finished making a point and was silent, her eyes 
stayed hungrily on my face. I sensed she couldn’t wait to savor the 
next insight to spout from my lips. I loved it! Her concentration 
and obvious fascination inspired me to remember stories and make 
important points I’d long forgotten. 

Right after my talk, I resolved to seek out this new friend who 
was so enthralled by my speech. As people were leaving the hall, 
I quickly sidled up behind my big fan. “Excuse me,” I said. My 
fan kept walking. “Excuse me,” I repeated a tad louder. My 
admirer didn’t vary her pace as she continued out the door. I fol¬ 
lowed her into the corridor and tapped her shoulder gently. This 
time she whirled around with a surprised look on her face. I mum¬ 
bled some excuse about my appreciating her concentration on my 
talk and wanting to ask her a few questions. 



How to Strike Everyone as Intelligent and Insightful by Using Your Eyes n 


“Did you, uh, get much out of the seminar?” I ventured. 

“Well, not really,” she answered candidly. “I had difficulty 
understanding what you were saying because you were walking 
around on the platform facing different directions.” 

In a heartbeat, I understood. The woman was hearing 
impaired. I did not captivate her as I had suspected. She was not 
intrigued by my talk as I had hoped. The only reason she kept her 
eyes glued on my face was because she was struggling to read my 
lips! 

Nevertheless, her eye contact had given me such pleasure and 
inspiration during my talk that, tired as I was, I asked her to join 
me for coffee. I spent the next hour recapping my entire seminar 
just for her. Powerful stuff this eye contact. 

Make Your Eyes Look Even 
More Intelligent 

There is yet another argument for intense eye contact. In addition 
to awakening feelings of respect and affection, maintaining strong 
eye contact gives you the impression of being an intelligent and 
abstract thinker. Because abstract thinkers integrate incoming data 
more easily than concrete thinkers, they can continue looking into 
someone’s eyes even during the silences. Their thought processes 
are not distracted by peering into their partner’s peepers . 6 

Back to our valiant psychologists. Yale researchers, thinking 
they had the unswerving truth about eye contact, conducted 
another study that, they assumed, would confirm “the more eye 
contact, the more positive feelings.” This time, they directed sub¬ 
jects to deliver a personally revealing monologue. They asked the 
listeners to react with a sliding scale of eye contact while their part¬ 
ners talked. 

The results? All went as expected when women told their per¬ 
sonal stories to women. Increased eye contact encouraged feelings 



i2 How to Talk to Anyone 


of intimacy. But, whoops, it wasn’t so with the men. Some men 
felt hostile when stared at too long by another man. Other men 
felt threatened. Some few even suspected their partner was more 
interested than he should be and wanted to slug him. 

Your partner’s emotional reaction to your profound gaze has 
a biological base. When you look intently at someone, it increases 
their heartbeat and shoots an adrenalinelike substance gushing 
through their veins . 7 This is the same physical reaction people have 
when they start to fall in love. And when you consciously increase 
your eye contact, even during normal business or social interac¬ 
tion, people will feel they have captivated you. 

Men talking to women and women talking to men or women: 
use the following technique, which I call “Sticky Eyes,” for the joy 
of the recipient—and for your own advantage. (Guys, I’ll have a 
man-to-man modification of this technique for you in a moment.) 


4 * 


ECHNIQUE #2 

Sticky Eyes 


Pretend your eyes are glued to your conversation 
partner’s with sticky warm taffy. Don’t break eye 
contact even after he or she has finished speaking. 
When you must look away, do it ever so slowly, 
reluctantly, stretching the gooey taffy until the tiny 
string finally breaks. 


What About Guys’ Eyes? 

Now gentlemen: when talking to men, you, too, can use Sticky 
Eyes. Just make them a little less sticky when discussing personal 
matters with other men, lest your listener feel threatened or mis¬ 
interpret your intentions. But do increase your eye contact slightly 



How to Strike Everyone as Intelligent and Insightful by Using Your Eyes 13 


more than normal with men on day-to-day communications— 
and a lot more when talking to women. It broadcasts a visceral 
message of comprehension and respect. 

I have a friend, Sammy, a salesman who unwittingly comes 
across as an arrogant chap. He doesn’t mean to, but sometimes his 
brusque manner makes it look like he’s running roughshod over 
people’s feelings. 

Once while we were having dinner together in a restaurant, I 
told him about the Sticky Eyes technique. I guess he took it to 
heart. When the waiter came over, Sammy, uncharacteristically, 
instead of bluntly blurting out his order with his nose in the menu, 
looked at the waiter. He smiled, gave his order for the appetizer, 
and kept his eyes on the waiter’s for an extra second before look¬ 
ing down again at the menu to choose the main dish. I can’t tell 
you how different Sammy seemed to me just then! He came across 
as a sensitive and caring man, and all it took was two extra sec¬ 
onds of eye contact. I saw the effect it had on the waiter, too. We 
received exceptionally gracious service the rest of the evening. 

A week later Sammy called me and said, “Leil, Sticky Eyes has 
changed my life. I’ve been following it to a T. With women, I 
make my eyes real sticky and with men slightly sticky. And now 
everybody’s treating me with such deference. I think it’s part of 
the reason I’ve made more sales this week than all last month!” 

If you deal with customers or clients in your professional life, 
Sticky Eyes is a definite boon to your bottom line. To most peo¬ 
ple in our culture, profound eye contact signals trust, knowledge, 
an “I’m here for you” attitude. 

Let’s carry Sticky Eyes one step further. Like a potent medi¬ 
cine that has the power to kill or cure, the next eye-contact tech¬ 
nique has the potential to captivate or annihilate. 



3 How to Use Your Eyes 
to Make Someone Fall 
in Love with You 


Now we haul in the heavy eyeball artillery: very sticky eyes or 
superglue eyes. Lets call them “Epoxy Eyes.” Big bosses use Epoxy 
Eyes to evaluate employees. Police investigators use Epoxy Eyes to 
intimidate suspected criminals. And clever Romeos use Epoxy 
Eyes to make women fall in love with them. (If romance is your 
goal, Epoxy Eyes is a proven aphrodisiac.) 

The Epoxy Eyes technique takes at least three people to pull 
off—you, your target, and one other person. Here’s how it works. 
Usually, when you’re chatting with two or more people, you gaze 
at the person who is speaking. However, the Epoxy Eyes technique 
suggests you concentrate on the listener—your target—rather than 
the speaker. This slightly disorients the target and he or she silently 
asks, “Why is this person looking at me instead of the speaker?” 
Your target senses you are extremely interested in his or her reac¬ 
tions. This can be beneficial in certain business situations when it 
is appropriate that you judge the listener. 

Human resources professionals often use Epoxy Eyes, not as 
a technique, but because they are sincerely interested in a pro¬ 
spective employee’s reaction to certain ideas being presented. 
Attorneys, bosses, police investigators, psychologists, and others 


14 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Use Your Eyes to Make Someone Fall in Love with You 15 


who must examine subjects’ reactions also use Epoxy Eyes for ana¬ 
lytical purposes. 

When you use Epoxy Eyes, it sends out signals of interest 
blended with complete confidence in yourself. But because Epoxy 
Eyes puts you in a position of evaluating or judging someone else, 
you must be careful. Don’t overdo it or you could come across as 
arrogant and brazen. 


-V. 


ECHNIQUE #3 

Epoxy Eyes 


This brazen technique packs a powerful punch. Watch 
your target person even when someone else is talking. 
No matter who is speaking, keep looking at the man or 
woman you want to impact. 


Sometimes using full Epoxy Eyes is too potent, so here is a 
gentler, yet effective, form. Watch the speaker but let your glance 
bounce to your target each time the speaker finishes a point. This 
way Mr. or Ms. Target still feels you are intrigued by his or her 
reactions, yet there is relief from the intensity. 


Use Epoxy Eyes to Push Their 
Erotic Button 

If romance is on the horizon, Epoxy Eyes transmits yet another 
message. It says, “I can’t take my eyes off you” or “I only have eyes 
for you.” Anthropologists have dubbed eyes “the initial organ of 
romance” because studies show intense eye contact plays havoc 
with our heartbeat . 8 It also releases a druglike substance into our 



16 How to Talk to Anyone 


nervous system called phenylethylamine. Since this is the hormone 
detected in the human body during erotic excitement, intense eye 
contact can be a turn-on. 

Men, Epoxy Eyes is extremely effective on women—if they 
find you attractive. The lady interprets her nervous reaction to 
your untoward gaze as budding infatuation. If she does not like 
you, however, your Epoxy Eyes is downright obnoxious. (Never 
use Epoxy Eyes on strangers in public settings or you could get 
arrested!) 



4 How to Look Like a 
Big Winner Wherever 
You 60 


Do you remember the lyrics to the old Shirley Bassey song? “The 
minute you walked in the joint, I could see you were a man of dis¬ 
tinction—a real big spender. Good looking, so refined. Say 
wouldn’t you like to know what’s going on in my mind?” 

The goal of this first section is not to make you look like a 
real big spender. Rather it is to give you the cachet of a real big 
Somebody the moment people lay eyes on you. To that end, we 
now explore the most important technique to make you look like 
a very important person. 

When the doctor smacks your knee with that nasty little ham¬ 
mer, your foot jerks forward. Thus the phrase knee-jerk reaction. 
Your body has another instinctive reaction. When a big jolt of hap¬ 
piness hits your heart and you feel like a winner, your head jerks 
up automatically and you throw your shoulders back. A smile 
frames your lips and softens your eyes. 

This is the look winners have constantly. They stand with 
assurance. They move with confidence. They smile softly with 
pride. No doubt about it—good posture symbolizes that you are 
a man or woman who is used to being on top. 


17 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



18 How to Talk to Anyone 


Obviously millions of mothers sticking their knuckles be¬ 
tween their kids’ shoulder blades, and trillions of teachers telling 
students, “Stand up straight!” hasn’t done the trick. We are a 
nation of slouchers. We need a technique more stern than teach¬ 
ers and more persuasive than parents to make us stand like a 
Somebody. 

In one profession, perfect posture, perfect equilibrium, per¬ 
fect balance is not only desirable—it’s a matter of life and death. 
One false move, one slump of the shoulders, one hangdog look, 
can mean curtains for the high-wire acrobat. 

I’ll never forget the first time Mama took me to the circus. 
When seven men and women raced into the center ring, the 
crowd rose as though they were all joined at the hips. They 
cheered with one thunderous voice. Mama pressed her lips against 
my ear and reverently whispered these were the Great Wallen- 
das, the only troupe in the world to perform the seven-person 
pyramid without a net. 

In an instant, the crowd became hushed. Not a cough or a 
soda slurp was heard in the big top as Karl and Herman Wallenda 
shouted cues in German to their trusting relatives. The family 
meticulously and majestically ascended into the position of a 
human pyramid. They then balanced precariously on a thin wire 
hundreds of feet above the hard dirt with no net between them 
and sudden death. The vision was unforgettable. 

To me, equally unforgettable was the beauty and grace of the 
seven Wallendas racing into the center of the big top to take their 
bows. Each perfectly aligned—head high, shoulders back—stand¬ 
ing so tall it still didn’t seem like their feet were touching the 
ground. Every muscle in their bodies defined pride, success, and 
their joy of being alive. (Still!) Here is a visualization technique to 
get your body looking like a winner who is in the habit of feeling 
that pride, success, and joy of being alive. 



How to Look Like a Big Winner Wherever You Go ip 


Your Posture Is Y)ur Biggest 
Success Barometer 

Imagine you are a world-renowned acrobat, master of the iron-jaw 
act waiting in the wings of the Ringling Bros, and Barnum &amp; Bai¬ 
ley Circus. Soon you will dart into the center ring to captivate the 
crowd with the precision and balance of your body. 

Before walking through any door—the door to your office, a 
party, a meeting, even your kitchen—picture a leather bit hang¬ 
ing by a cable from the frame. It is swinging just an inch higher 
than your head. As you pass through the door, throw your head 
back and chomp on the imaginary dental grip that first pulls your 
cheeks back into a smile and then lifts you up. As you ascend high 
above the gasping crowd, your body is stretched into perfect align¬ 
ment—head high, shoulders back, torso out of hips, feet weight¬ 
less. At the zenith of the tent, you spin like a graceful top to the 
amazement and admiration of the crowd craning their necks to 
watch you. Now you look like a Somebody. 

One day, to test Hang by Your Teeth, I decided to count how 
many times I walked through a doorway: sixty times, even at 
home. You calculate: twice out your front door, twice in, six times 
to the bathroom, eight times to the kitchen, and through count¬ 
less doors at your office. It adds up. Visualize anything sixty times 
a day and it becomes a habit! Habitual good posture is the first 
mark of a big winner. 

You are now ready to float into the room to captivate the 
crowd or close the sale (or maybe just settle for looking like the 
most important Somebody in the room). 

You now have all the basics Bob the artist needs to portray 
you as a big winner. Like he said, “great posture, a heads-up look, 
a confident smile, and a direct gaze.” The ideal image for some¬ 
body who’s a Somebody. 



20 How to Talk to Anyone 


Zh 


ECHNIQUE #4 

Hang by Your Teeth 


Visualize a circus iron-jaw bit hanging from the frame 
of every door you walk through. Take a bite and, with 
it firmly between your teeth, let it swoop you to the 
peak of the big top. When you hang by your teeth, 
every muscle is stretched into perfect posture position. 


Now let’s put the whole act into motion. It’s time to turn your 
attention outward to your conversation partner. Use the next two 
techniques to make him or her feel like a million. 



5^ How to Win Their 
Heart hy Responding to 
Their “Inner Infant” 


Remember the old joke? The comic comes onstage and the first 
words out of his mouth are, “Well, how do you like me so far?” 
The audience always cracks up. Why? Because we all silently ask 
that question. Whenever we meet someone, we know, consciously 
or subconsciously, how they’re reacting to us. 

Do they look at us? Do they smile? Do they lean toward us? 
Do they somehow recognize how wonderful and special we are? 
We like those people. They have good taste. Or do they turn away, 
obviously unimpressed by our magnificence. The cretins! 

Two people getting to know each other are like little puppies 
sniffing each other out. We don’t have tails that wag or hair that 
bristles. But we do have eyes that narrow or widen. And hands 
that flash knuckles or subconsciously soften in the palms-up “I 
submit” position. We have dozens of other involuntary reactions 
that take place in the first few moments of togetherness. 

Attorneys conducting voir dire are exquisitely aware of this. 
They pay close attention to your instinctive body reactions. They 
watch to see how fully you are facing them and just how far for¬ 
ward or back you’re leaning while answering their questions. They 
check out your hands. Are they softly open, palms up, signifying 
acceptance of the ideas they’re expressing? Or are you making a 
slight fist, knuckles out, signaling rejection? They scrutinize your 

21 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



22 How to Talk to Anyone 


face for the split seconds you break eye contact when discussing 
relevant subjects like your feelings on big awards for damages or 
the death penalty. Sometimes attorneys bring along a legal assis¬ 
tant whose sole job is to sit on the sidelines and take precise note 
of your every fidget. 

An interesting aside: trial lawyers often choose women to do 
this twitch-and-turn spying job because, traditionally, females are 
sharper observers of subtle body cues than males. Women, more 
sensitive to emotions than men, often ask their husbands, “Is 
something bothering you, Honey?” (These supersensitive women 
accuse their husbands of being so insensitive to emotions that they 
wouldn’t notice anything is wrong until their neckties are drenched 
in her tears.) 

The attorney and the assistant then review your “score” on the 
dozens of subconscious signals you flashed. Depending on their 
tally, you could find yourself on jury duty or twiddling your 
thumbs back in the juror’s waiting room. 

Trial lawyers are so conscious of body language that, in the 
1960s during the famous trial of the Chicago Seven, defense attor¬ 
ney William Kuntsler actually made a legal objection to Judge 
Julius Hoffman’s posture. During the summation by the prosecu¬ 
tion, Judge Hoffman leaned forward, which, accused Kuntsler, 
sent a message to the jury of attention and interest. During his 
defense summation, complained Kuntsler, Judge Hoffman leaned 
back, sending the jury a subliminal message of disinterest. 

You’re on Trial—and You Only Have 
Ten Seconds 

Like attorneys deciding whether they want you on their case, 
everybody you meet makes a subconscious judgment on whether 
they want you in their lives. They base their verdict greatly on the 
same signals, your body-language answer to their unspoken ques¬ 
tion, “Well, how do you like me so far?” 



How to Win Their Heart by Responding to Their “Inner Infant” 25 


The first few moments of your reactions set the stage upon 
which the entire relationship will be played out. If you ever want 
anything from the new acquaintance, your unspoken answer to 
their unspoken question, “How do you like me so far?” must be, 
“Wow! I really like you.” 

When a little four year old feels bashful, he slumps, puts his 
arms up in front of his chest, steps back, and hides behind 
Mommy’s skirt. However, when little Johnny sees Daddy come 
home, he runs up to him, he smiles, his eyes get wide, and he 
opens his arms for a hug. A loving child’s body is like a tiny flower 
bud unfolding to the sunshine. 

Twenty, thirty, forty, fifty years of life on earth make little dif¬ 
ference. When forty-year-old Johnny is feeling timid, he slumps 
and folds his arms in front of his chest. When he wants to reject 
a salesman or business colleague, he turns away and closes him off 
with a myriad of body signals. However, when welcoming his 
loved one home after an absence, big Johnny opens his body to 
her like a giant daffodil spreading its petals to the sun after a 
rainstorm. 


Treat People Like Big Babies 

Once I was at a corporate star-studded party with an attractive, 
recently divorced friend of mine. Carla had been a copywriter 
with one of the leading advertising agencies which, like so many 
companies then, had downsized. My girlfriend was both out of 
work and out of a relationship. 

At this particular party, the pickings for Carla were good, both 
personally and professionally. Several times as Carla and I stood 
talking, one good-looking corporate male beast or another would 
find himself within a few feet of us. More often than not, one of 
these desirable males would flash his teeth at Carla. She sometimes 
graced the tentatively courting male with a quick smile over her 
shoulder. But then she’d turn back to our mundane conversation 



24 How to Talk to Anyone 


as though she were hanging on my every word. I knew she was 
trying not to look anxious, but inside Carla was crying out, “Why 
doesn’t he come speak to us?” 

Right after one prize corporate Big Cat smiled but, because 
of Carla’s minimal reaction, wandered back into the social jungle, 
I had to say, “Carla, do you know who that was? He’s the head of 
the Young &amp; Rubicam in Paris. They’re looking for copywriters 
willing to relocate. And he’s single!” Carla moaned. 

Just then we heard a little voice down by Carla’s left knee. 
“Hello!” We looked down simultaneously. Little five-year-old 
Willie, the hostess’s adorable young son, was tugging on Carla’s 
skirt, obviously craving attention. 

“Well, well, well,” Carla cried out, a big smile erupting all over 
her face. Carla turned toward him. Carla kneeled down, touched 
little Willie’s elbow, and crooned, “Well, hello there, Willie. How 
are you enjoying Mommy’s nice party?” 

Little Willie beamed. 

When little Willie finally trundled off to tug on the garments 
of the next group of potential attention givers, Carla and I 
returned to our grown-up conversing. During our chat, corporate 
beasts continued to stalk Carla with their eyes and she continued 
casting half smiles at them. She was obviously disappointed none 
of them was making a further approach. I had to bite my tongue. 
Finally, when I felt it was going to bleed from the pressure of my 
teeth, I said, “Carla, have you been noticing that four or five men 
have come over and smiled at you.” 

“Yes,” Carla whispered, her eyes darting nervously around the 
room lest anyone overhear us. 

“And you’ve been giving them little half smiles,” I continued. 

“Yes,” she murmured, now confused at my question. 

“Remember when little Willie came up and tugged on your 
skirt? Do you recall how you smiled that beautiful big smile of 
yours, turned toward him, and welcomed him into our grown-up 
conversation?” 



How to Win Their Heart by Responding to Their “Inner Infant” 25 


“Yee-es,” she answered haltingly. 

“Well, I have a request, Carla. I want you to give the next man 
who smiles at you that same big smile you gave Willie. I want you 
to turn toward him just like you did then. Maybe even reach out 
and touch his arm like you did Willie’s, and then welcome him 
into our conversation.” 

“Oh Leil, I couldn’t do that.” 

“Carla, do it!” Sure enough, within a few minutes, another 
attractive man wandered our way and smiled. Carla played her role 
to perfection. She flashed her beautiful teeth, turned fully toward 
him, and said, “Hello, come join us.” He wasted no time accept¬ 
ing Carla’s invitation. 

After a few moments, I excused myself. Neither noticed my 
departure because they were in animated conversation. The last 
glimpse I had of my friend at the party was her floating out the 
door on the arm of her new friend. 

Just then the technique I call “The Big-Baby Pivot” was born. 
It is a skill that will help you win whatever your heart desires from 
whatever type of beasts you encounter in the social or corporate 
jungle. 




ECHNIQUE #5 

The Big-Baby Pivot 


Give everyone you meet The Big-Baby Pivot. The 
instant the two of you are introduced, reward your new 
acquaintance. Give the warm smile, the total-body 
turn, and the undivided attention you would give a tiny 
tyke who crawled up to your feet, turned a precious 
face up to yours, and beamed a big toothless grin. 
Pivoting too percent toward the new person shouts “I 
think you are very, very special.” 



26 How to Talk to Anyone 


Remember, buried deep inside everyone is a big baby who is 
rattling the crib, wailing out for recognition of how very special 
he or she is. 

The following technique reinforces the big baby’s suspicion 
that he or she is, indeed, the center of the universe. 



6 How to Make Someone 
Feel Like an Old Friend 
at Once 


A very wise man with the funny name of Zig 9 once told me, “Peo¬ 
ple don’t care how much you know until they know how much 
you care . . . about them.” Zig Ziglar is right. The secret to mak¬ 
ing people like you is showing how much you like them! 

Your body is a twenty-four-hour broadcasting station reveal¬ 
ing to anyone within eyeshot precisely how you feel at any given 
moment. Even if your Hang by Your Teeth posture is gaining their 
respect, your Flooding Smile and The Big-Baby Pivot are making 
them feel special, and your Sticky Eyes are capturing their hearts 
and minds, the rest of your body can reveal any incongruence. 
Every inch—from the crinkle of your forehead to the position of 
your feet—must give a command performance if you want to 
effectively present an “I care about you” attitude. 

Unfortunately, when meeting someone, our brains are in over¬ 
drive. Remember Shakespeare’s Julius Caesar'. He said of Cassius, 
he “has a lean and hungry look ... he thinks too much . . . such 
men are dangerous.” So it is with our brains when conversing with 
a new acquaintance. Our brains become lean. (Some of us are 
fighting off shyness. Others are frantically sizing up the situation.) 
And hungry. (We’re deciding what, if anything, we want from this 
potential relationship.) So we think too much instead of respond- 


27 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



28 How to Talk to Anyone 


ing with candid, unself-conscious friendliness. Such actions are 
dangerous to impending friendship, love, or commerce. 

When our bodies are shooting off ten thousand bullets of 
stimuli every second, a few shots are apt to misfire and reveal shy¬ 
ness or hidden hostility. We need a technique to ensure every shot 
aims right at the heart of our subject. We need to trick our bod¬ 
ies into reacting perfectly. 

To find it, let’s explore the only time we don’t need to worry 
about any shyness or negativity slipping out through our body lan¬ 
guage. It’s when we feel none. That happens when we’re chatting 
with close friends. When we see someone we love or feel com¬ 
pletely comfortable with, we respond warmly from head to toe 
without a thought. Our lips part happily. We step closer. Our arms 
reach out. Our eyes become soft and wide. Even our palms turn 
up and our bodies turn fully toward our dear friend. 

How to Trick Your Body into Doing 
Everything Right 

Here’s a visualization technique that accomplishes all that. It guar¬ 
antees that everyone you encounter will feel your warmth. I call 
it “Hello Old Friend.” 

When meeting someone, play a mental trick on yourself. In 
your mind’s eye, see him or her as an old friend, someone you had 
a wonderful relationship with years ago. But somehow you lost 
track of your friend. You tried so hard to find your good buddy, 
but there was no listing in the phone book. No information online. 
None of your mutual friends had a clue. 

Suddenly, WOW! What a surprise! After all those years, the 
two of you are reunited. You are so happy. 

That’s where the pretending stops. Obviously, you are not 
going to try to convince the new person that the two of you are 
really old friends. You are not going to hug and kiss and say, “Great 
to see you again!” or “How have you been all these years?” You 



How to Make Someone Feel Like an Old Friend at Once 29 


merely say, “Hello,” “How do you do,” “I am pleased to meet 
you.” But, inside, it’s a very different story. 

You will amaze yourself. The delight of rediscovery fills your 
face and buoys up your body language. I sometimes jokingly say 
if you were a light, you’d beam on the other person. If you were 
a dog, you’d be wagging your tail. You make this new person feel 
very special indeed. 




ECHNIQUE #6 

Hello Old Friend 


When meeting someone, imagine he or she is an old 
friend (an old customer, an old beloved, or someone 
else you had great affection for). How sad, the vicis¬ 
situdes of life tore you two asunder. But, holy mack¬ 
erel, now the party (the meeting, the convention) has 
reunited you with your long-lost old friend! 

The joyful experience starts a remarkable chain 
reaction in your body from the subconscious softening 
of your eyebrows to the positioning of your toes—and 
everything between. 


In my seminars, I first have people introduce themselves to 
another participant before they’ve learned the Hello Old Friend 
technique. The group chats as though at a pleasant semiformal 
gathering. Later I ask them to introduce themselves to another 
stranger, imagining they are old friends. The difference is extraor¬ 
dinary. When they’re using Hello Old Friend, the room comes 
alive. The atmosphere is charged with good feeling. The air 
sparkles with happier, high-energy people. They are standing 
closer, laughing more sincerely, and reaching out to one another. I 
feel like I’m attending a terrific bash that’s been going on for hours. 



50 How to Talk to Anyone 


Not a Word Need Be Spoken 

The Hello Old Friend technique even supersedes language. When¬ 
ever you’re traveling in countries where you don’t speak the native 
tongue, be sure to use it. If you find yourself with a group of peo¬ 
ple who are all speaking a language unknown to you, just imag¬ 
ine them to be a group of your old friends. Everything is fine 
except they momentarily forgot how to speak English. In spite of 
the fact you won’t understand a word, your whole body still 
responds with congeniality and acceptance. 

I’ve used the Hello Old Friend technique while traveling in 
Europe. Sometimes my English-speaking friends who live there 
tell me their European colleagues say I am the friendliest Ameri¬ 
can they’ve ever met. Yet, we’d never spoken a word between us! 


A Self-Fulfilling Prophecy 

An added benefit to the Hello Old Friend technique is it becomes a 
self-fulfilling prophecy. When you act as though you like someone, 
you start to really like them. An Adelphi University study called, 
appropriately, “Believing Another Likes or Dislikes You: Behaviors 
Making the Beliefs Come True” proved it. 10 Researchers told vol¬ 
unteers to treat unsuspecting subjects as though they liked them. 
When surveyed later, the results showed the volunteers wound up 
genuinely liking the subjects. The unsuspecting subj
ects were also 
surveyed. These respondents expressed much higher respect and 
affection for the volunteers who pretended they liked them. What 
it boils down to is love begets love, like begets like, respect begets 
respect. Use the Hello Old Friend technique and you will soon have 
many new “old friends” who wind up genuinely liking you. 

You now have all the basics to come across to everyone you 
meet as a Somebody, a friendly Somebody. But your job isn’t over 
yet. In addition to being liked, you want to appear credible, intel¬ 
ligent, and sure of yourself. Each of the next three techniques 
accomplishes one of those goals. 



7 How to Come Across 
as 100 Percent Credible 
to Everyone 

My friend Helen is a highly respected headhunter. She makes ter¬ 
rific hires for her clients and I once asked her the secret of her suc¬ 
cess. Helen replied, “Probably because I can almost always tell 
when an applicant is lying.” 

“How can you tell?” 

She said, “Well, just last week, I was interviewing a young 
woman for a position as marketing director for a small firm. 
Throughout the interview, the applicant had been sitting with her 
left leg crossed over her right. Her hands were comfortably rest¬ 
ing in her lap and she was looking directly at me. 

“I asked her salary. Without swerving her eyes from mine, she 
told me. I asked if she enjoyed her work. Still looking directly at 
me, she said, ‘yes.’ Then I asked her why she left her previous job. 

“At that point, her eyes fleetingly darted away before regain¬ 
ing eye contact with me.” Helen continued. “Then, while answer¬ 
ing my question, she shifted in her seat and crossed her right leg 
over her left. At one point, she put her hands up to her mouth.” 

Helen said, “That’s all I needed. With her words she was 
telling me she felt her ‘growth opportunities were limited at her 
previous firm.’ But her body told me she was not being entirely 
forthright.” 


3i 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



52 How to Talk to Anyone 


Helen went on to explain the young woman’s fidgeting alone 
wouldn’t prove she was lying. Nevertheless, it was enough, she said, 
that she wanted to pursue the subject further. 

“So I tested it.” Helen explained. “I changed the subject and 
went back to more neutral territory. I asked her about her goals 
for the future. Again, the girl stopped fidgeting. She folded her 
hands in her lap as she told me how she’d always wanted to work 
in a small company in order to have hands-on experience with 
more than one project. 

“Then I repeated my earlier question. I asked again if it was 
only the lack of growth opportunity that made her leave her pre¬ 
vious position. Sure enough, once again, the woman shifted in her 
seat and momentarily broke eye contact. As she continued talking 
about her last job, she started rubbing her forearm.” 

Helen continued to probe until she finally uncovered the 
truth. The applicant had been fired because of a nasty disagree¬ 
ment with the marketing director for whom she worked. 

Human resources professionals who interview applicants and 
police officers who interrogate suspected criminals are trained to 
detect lies. They know specifically what signals to look for. The 
rest of us, although not knowledgeable about specific clues to 
deceit, have a sixth sense when someone is not telling us the truth. 

Just recently a colleague of mine was considering hiring an in- 
house booking agent. After interviewing one fellow she said to me, 
“I don’t know. I don’t really think he has the success he claims.” 

“You think he’s lying to you?” I asked. 

“Absolutely. And the funny thing is I can’t tell why. He looked 
right at me. He answered all my questions directly. There was just 
something that didn’t seem right.” 

Employers often feel this way. They have a gut feeling about 
someone but they can’t put their finger on it. Because of that, 
many large companies turn to the polygraph, or lie detector, a 
mechanical apparatus designed to detect if someone is lying. 



How to Come Across as 100 Percent Credible to Everyone 33 


Banks, drugstores, and grocery stores rely heavily on it for pre¬ 
employment screening. The FBI, Justice Department, and most 
police departments have used the polygraph on suspects. Interest¬ 
ingly, the polygraph is not a lie detector at all! All the machine can 
do is detect fluctuations in our autonomic nervous system— 
changes in breathing patterns, sweating, flushing, heart rate, blood 
pressure, and other signs of emotional arousal. 

So is it accurate? Well, yes, often it is. Why? Because when 
the average person tells a lie, he or she is emotionally aroused and 
bodily changes do take place. When that happens, the individual 
might fidget. Experienced or trained liars, however, can fool the 
polygraph. 

Beware of the Appearance of Lying— 

Even When You’re Telling the Truth 

Problems arise for us when we are not lying but are feeling emo¬ 
tional or intimidated by the person with whom we are talking. A 
young man telling an attractive woman about his business success 
might shift his weight. A woman talking about her company’s 
track record to an important client could rub her neck. 

More problems arise out of the atmosphere. A businessman 
who doesn’t feel nervous at all could loosen his collar because the 
room is hot. A politician giving a speech outdoors could blink 
excessively because the air is dusty. Even though erroneous, these 
fidgety movements give the listeners the sense something just isn’t 
right or a gut feeling that the speaker is lying. 

Professional communicators, alert to this hazard, consciously 
squelch any signs anyone could mistake for shiftiness. They fix a 
constant gaze on the listener. They never put their hands on their 
faces. They don’t massage their arm when it tingles or rub their 
nose when it itches. They don’t loosen their collar when it’s hot or 
blink because it’s sandy. They don’t wipe away tiny perspiration 



54 How to Talk to Anyone 


beads in public or shield their eyes from the sun. They suffer 
because they know fidgeting undermines credibility. Consider the 
infamous September 25, i960, televised presidential debate 
between Richard Milhous Nixon and John Fitzgerald Kennedy. 
Political pundits speculate Nixon’s lack of makeup, his fidgeting, 
and mopping his brow on camera lost him the election. 

If you want to come across as an entirely credible Somebody, 
try to squelch all extraneous movement when your communica¬ 
tion counts. I call the technique “Limit the Fidget.” 


Zb 


ECHNIQUE #7 

Limit the Fidget 


Whenever your conversation really counts, let your nose 
itch, your ear tingle, or your foot prickle. Do not 
fidget, twitch, wiggle, squirm, or scratch. And above 
all, keep your paws away from your puss. Fiand 
motions near your face and all fidgeting can give your 
listener the gut feeling you’re fibbing. 


Now let’s tackle intelligence. “What?” you ask. “Can people 
come across as more intelligent than they really are?” Well, did 
you ever hear of Hans, the counting horse? Hans was considered 
the most intelligent horse in history, and he used the technique 
I’m about to suggest. 



* How to Read People 
Like You Have ESP 


Hans, a very clever horse, inspires this next technique. Hans was 
owned by Herr von Osten, a Berliner, who had trained Hans to 
do simple arithmetic by tapping his right front hoof. So prodigious 
was Hans’s ability that the horse’s fame quickly spread throughout 
Europe in the early 1900s. He became known as Clever Hans, the 
counting horse. 

Herr von Osten taught Hans to do more than just add. Soon 
the horse could subtract and divide. In time, Clever Hans even 
mastered the multiplication tables. The horse became quite a phe¬ 
nomenon. Without his owner uttering a single word, Hans could 
count out the size of his audience, tap the number wearing glasses, 
or respond to any counting question they asked him. 

Finally, Hans achieved the ultimate ability that separates man 
from animal—language. Hans “learned” the alphabet. By tapping 
out hoof beats for each letter, he answered any question about any¬ 
thing humans had read in a newspaper or heard on the radio. He 
could even answer common questions about history, geography, 
and human biology. 

Hans made headlines and was the main topic of discussion at 
dinner parties throughout Europe. The “human horse” quickly 
attracted the attention of scientists, psychology professors, veteri- 


35 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



5 6 How to Talk to Anyone 


narians, even cavalry officers. Naturally they were skeptical, so 
they established an official commission to decide whether the horse 
was a case of clever trickery or equine genius. Whatever their sus¬ 
picions, it was obvious to all, Hans was a very smart horse. Com¬ 
pared to other horses, Hans was a Somebody. 

Cut to today. Why is it when you talk with certain individu¬ 
als you just know they are smarter than other people—that they 
are a Somebody? Often they’re not discussing highfalutin subjects 
or using two-dollar words. Nevertheless, everybody knows. Peo¬ 
ple say, “She’s smart as a whip,” “He doesn’t miss a trick,” “She 
picks up on everything,” “He’s got the right stuff,” “She’s got horse 
sense.” Which brings us back to Hans. 

The day of the big test arrived. Everyone was convinced it 
must be a trick orchestrated by Herr von Osten, Hans’s owner. It 
was standing room only in the auditorium filled with scientists, 
reporters, clairvoyants, psychics, and horse lovers who eagerly 
awaited the answer. The canny commission members were con¬ 
fident this was the day they would expose Hans as chicanery 
because they, too, had a trick up their sleeves. They were going 
to bar von Osten from the hall and put his horse to the test all 
alone. 

When the crowd was assembled, they told von Osten he must 
leave the auditorium. The surprised owner departed, and Hans 
was stranded in an auditorium with a suspicious and anxious 
audience. 

The confident commission leader asked Hans the first math¬ 
ematical question. He tapped out the right answer! A second. He 
got it right! Then a third. Then the language questions followed. 
He got them all right! 

The commission was befuddled. The critics were silenced. 

However, the public wasn’t. With a great outcry, they insisted 
on a new commission. The world waited while, once again, the 
authorities gathered scientists, professors, veterinarians, cavalry 
officers, and reporters from around the world. 



How to Read People Like You Have ESP 37 


Only after this second commission put Hans to the test did 
the truth about the clever horse come out. Commission number 
two started the enquiry perfunctorily with a simple addition prob¬ 
lem. This time, however, instead of asking the question out loud 
for all to hear, one researcher whispered a number in Hans’s ear, 
and a second researcher whispered another. Everyone expected 
Hans to quickly tap out the sum. But Hans remained dumb! Aha! 
The researchers revealed the truth to the waiting world. Can you 
guess what that was? 

Here’s a hint: when the audience or researcher knew the 
answer, Hans did, too. Now can you guess? 

People gave off very subtle body-language signals the moment 
Hans’s hoof gave the right number of taps. When Hans started 
tapping the answer to a question, the audience would show sub¬ 
tle signs of tension. Then, when Hans reached the right number, 
they responded by an expulsion of breath or slight relaxation of 
muscles. Von Osten had trained Hans to stop tapping at that point 
and therefore appear to give the right answer. 

Hans was using the technique I call “Hans’s Horse Sense.” He 
watched his audiences’ reactions very carefully and planned his 
responses accordingly. 

If a Horse Can Do It, So Can You 

Have you ever been watching TV when the phone rings? Someone 
asks you to hit the mute button on the television so they can talk. 
Because there’s no sound now, you watch the TV action more care¬ 
fully. You see performers smiling, scowling, smirking, squinting, 
and scores of other expressions. You don’t miss a bit of the story 
because, just from their expressions, you can tell what they’re think¬ 
ing. Hans’s Horse Sense is just that—watching people, seeing how 
they’re reacting, and then making your moves accordingly. Even 
while you’re talking, keep your eyes on your listeners and watch how 
they’re responding to what you’re saying. Don’t miss a trick. 



58 How to Talk to Anyone 


Are they smiling? Are they nodding? Are their palms up? They 
like what they’re hearing. 

Are they frowning? Are they looking away? Are their knuck¬ 
les clenched? Maybe they don’t. 

Are they rubbing their necks? Are they stepping back? Are 
their feet pointing toward the door? Maybe they want to get away. 

You don’t need a complete course in body language here. 
Already your life’s experience has given you a good grounding in 
that. Most people know if their conversation partners step back or 
look away, they’re not interested in what you’re saying. When they 
think you’re a pain in the neck they rub theirs. When they feel 
superior to you, they steeple their hands. 

We’ll explore more body-language specifics in Technique #77: 
Eyeball Selling. For the moment, all you need to do is tune to the 
silent channel being broadcast by the speaker. 


4 * 


ECHNIQUE #8 

Hans’s Horse Sense 


Make it a habit to get on a dual track while talking. 
Express yourself, but keep a keen eye on how your 
listener is reacting to what you’re saying. Then plan 
your moves accordingly. 

If a horse can do it, so can a human. People will say 
you pick up on everything. You never miss a trick. 
You’ve got horse sense. 


You now have eight techniques to help you come across as a 
confident, credible, and charismatic person who makes everyone 
he or she comes in contact with feel like a million. Let’s explore 
one last technique in this section to put it all together and make 
sure you don’t miss a beat. 



9y How to Make 
Sure You Don’t Miss 
a Single Beat 


You’ve seen professional skiing on television? The athlete at the top 
of the piste, every muscle primed and poised, waiting for the gun 
to propel him to ultimate victory. Look deeply into his eyes and 
you’ll see he is having an out-of-body experience. In his mind’s 
eye, the skier is swooshing down the slope, zapping back and forth 
between the poles, and sliding across the finish line in faster time 
than the world thought possible. The athlete is visualizing. 

All athletes do it: divers, runners, jumpers, javelin throwers, 
lugers, swimmers, skaters, acrobats. They visualize their magic 
before performing it. They see their own bodies bending, twist¬ 
ing, flipping, or flying through the air. They hear the sound of the 
wind, the splash in the water, the whirr of the javelin, the thud of 
its landing. They smell the grass, the cement, the pool, the dust. 
Before they move a muscle, professional athletes watch the whole 
movie, which, of course, ends in their own victory. 

Sports psychologists tell us visualization is not just for top- 
level competitive athletes. Studies show mental rehearsal helps 
weekend athletes sharpen their golf, their tennis, their running, 
whatever their favorite activity. Experts agree if you see the pic¬ 
tures, hear the sounds, and feel the movements of your body in 
your mind before you do the activity, the effect is powerful. 


39 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



40 How to Talk to Anyone 


“Twenty-Six Miles on My Mattress” 

Psychological mumbo jumbo? Absolutely not! My friend Richard 
runs marathons. Once, several years ago, a scant three weeks 
before the big New York marathon, an out-of-control car crashed 
into Richard’s and he was taken to the hospital. He was not badly 
injured. Nevertheless, his friends felt sorry for him because being 
laid up two weeks in bed would, naturally, knock him out of the 
big event. 

What a surprise when, on that crisp November marathon 
morning in Central Park, Richard showed up in his little shorts 
and big running shoes. 

“Richard, are you crazy? You’re in no shape to run. You’ve 
been in bed these past few weeks!” we all cried out. 

“My body may have been in bed,” he replied, “but I’ve been 
running.” 

“What?” we asked in unison. 

“Yep. Every day. Twenty-six miles, 385 yards, right there on 
my mattress.” Richard explained that in his imagination he saw 
himself traversing every step of the course. He saw the sights, 
heard the sounds, and felt the twitching movements in his mus¬ 
cles. He visualized himself racing in the marathon. 

Richard didn’t do as well as he had the year before, but the 
miracle is he finished the marathon, without injury, without exces¬ 
sive fatigue thanks to his visualization. It works in just about any 
endeavor you apply it to—including being a terrific communicator. 

Visualization works best when you feel totally relaxed. Only 
when you have a calm state of mind can you get clear, vivid 
images. Do your visualization in the quiet of your home or car 
before leaving for the party, the convention, or the big-deal meet¬ 
ing. See it all in your mind’s eye ahead of time. 

You now have the skills necessary to get you started on the 
right foot with any new person in your life. Think of yourself in 



How to Make Sure You Don’t Miss a Single Beat 41 




ECHNIQUE #9 

Watch the Scene Before You Make the Scene 


Rehearse being the Super Somebody you want to be 
ahead of time. SEE yourself walking around with Hang 
by Your Teeth posture, shaking hands, smiling the 
Flooding Smile, and making Sticky Eyes. HEAR your¬ 
self chatting comfortably with everyone. FEEL the 
pleasure of knowing you are in peak form and everyone 
is gravitating toward you. VISUALIZE yourself a Super 
Somebody. Then it all happens automatically. 


these first moments like a rocket taking off. When the folks at 
Cape Kennedy aim a spacecraft for the moon, a mistake in the 
millionth of a degree at the beginning, when the craft is still on 
the ground, means missing the moon by thousands of miles. Like¬ 
wise, a tiny body-language blooper at the outset of a relationship 
may mean you will never make a hit with that person. But with 
The Flooding Smile, Sticky Eyes, Epoxy Eyes, Hang by Your 
Teeth, The Big-Baby Pivot, Hello Old Friend, Limit the Fidget, 
Hans’s Horse Sense, and Watch the Scene Before You Make the 
Scene, you’ll be right on course to get whatever you eventually 
want from anybody—be it business, friendship, or love. 

We now move from the silent world to the spoken word. 



This page intentionally left blank. 



PART TWO 

How to Know What 
to Say After You 
Say “Hi” 


Just as the first glimpse should please their eyes, your first words 
should delight their ears. Your tongue is a welcome mat embossed 
with either “Welcome” or “Go Away!” To make your conversation 
partner feel welcome, you must master small talk. 

Small talk! Can you hear the shudder? Those two little words 
drive a stake into the hearts of some otherwise fearless and 
undaunted souls. Invite them to a party where they don’t know 
anyone, and it mainlines queasiness into their veins. 

If this sounds familiar, take consolation from the fact that the 
brighter the individual, the more he or she detests small talk. 
When consulting for Fortune 500 companies, I was astounded. 
Top executives, completely comfortable making big talk with their 
boards of directors or addressing their stockholders, confessed they 
felt like little lost children at parties where the pratter was less than 
prodigious. 

Small-talk haters take further consolation from the fact that 
you are in star-studded company. Fear of small talk and stage 
fright are the same thing. The butterflies you feel in your stom¬ 
ach when you’re in a roomful of strangers flutter ’round the turn¬ 
ed 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



44 How to Talk to Anyone 


mies of top performers. Pablo Casals complained of lifelong stage 
fright. Carly Simon curtailed live performances because of it. A 
friend of mine who worked with Neil Diamond said he insisted 
the words to “Song Sung Blue,” a tune he’d been crooning for forty 
years, be displayed on his teleprompter, lest fear freeze him into 
forgetfulness. 


Is Small-Talk-a-Phobia Curable? 

Someday, scientists say, communications fears may be treatable 
with drugs. They’re already experimenting with Prozac to change 
people’s personalities. But some fear disastrous side effects. The 
good news is that when human beings think, and genuinely feel, 
certain emotions—like confidence that they have specific tech¬ 
niques to fall back on—the brain manufactures its own antidotes. 
If fear and distaste of small talk is the disease, knowing solid tech¬ 
niques like the ones we explore in this section is the cure. 

Incidentally, science is beginning to recognize it’s not chance 
or even upbringing that one person has a belly of butterflies and 
another doesn’t. In our brains, neurons communicate through 
chemicals called neurotransmitters. Some people have excessive 
levels of a neurotransmitter called norepinephrine, a chemical 
cousin of adrenaline. For some children, just walking into a kinder¬ 
garten room makes them want to run and hide under a table. 

As a tot, I spent a lot of time under the table. As a preteen in 
an all-girls boarding school, my legs turned to linguine every time 
I had to converse with a male. In eighth grade, I once had to invite 
a boy to our school prom. The entire selection of dancing males 
lived in the dormitory of our brother school. And I only knew one 
resident, Eugene. I had met Eugene at summer camp the year 
before. Mustering all my courage, I decided to call him. 

Two weeks before the dance, I felt the onset of sweaty palms. 
I put the call off. One week before, rapid heartbeat set in. I put 



How to Know What to Say After You Say “Hi ” 45 


the call off. Finally, three days before the big bash, breathing 
became difficult. Time was running out. 

The critical moment, I rationalized, would be easier if I read 
from a script. I wrote out the following: “Hi, this is Leil. We met 
at camp last summer. Remember?” (I programmed in a pause 
where I hoped he would say “yes.”) “Well, National Cathedral 
School’s prom is this Saturday night and I’d like you to be my 
date.” (I programmed in another pause where I prayed he’d say 
“yes.”) 

On Thursday before the dance, I could no longer delay the 
inevitable. I picked up the receiver and dialed. Clutching the 
phone waiting for Eugene to answer, my eyes followed perspira¬ 
tion droplets rolling down my arm and dripping off my elbow. A 
small salty puddle was forming around my feet. “Hello?” a sexy, 
deep male voice answered the dorm phone. 

In faster-than-a-speeding-bullet voice, like a nervous novice 
telemarketer, I shot out, “Hi, this is Leil. We-met-at-camp—last- 
summer-remember?” Forgetting to pause for his assent, I raced on, 
“Well-National-Cathedral-School’s-prom-is-this-Saturday-night- 
and-I’d-like-you-to-be-my-date.” 

To my relief and delight, I heard a big, cheerful “Oh that’s 
great, I’d love to!” I exhaled my first normal breath all day. He con¬ 
tinued, “I’ll pick you up at the girl’s dorm at 7:30. I’ll have a pink 
carnation for you. Will that go with your dress? And my name is 
Donnie.” 

Donnie? Donnie! Who said anything about Donnie? 

Well, Donnie turned out to be the best date I had that decade. 
Donnie had buckteeth, a head full of tousled red hair, and com¬ 
munications skills that immediately put me at ease. 

On Saturday night, Donnie greeted me at the door, carnation 
in hand and grin on face. He joked self-deprecatingly about how 
he was dying to go to the prom so, knowing it was a case of mis¬ 
taken identity, he accepted anyway. He told me he was thrilled 



46 How to Talk to Anyone 


when “the girl with the lovely voice” called, and he took full 
responsibility for “tricking” me into an invitation. Donnie made 
me comfortable and confident as we chatted. First we made small 
talk and then he gradually led me into subjects I was interested in. 
I flipped over Donnie, and he became my very first boyfriend. 

Donnie instinctively had the small-talk skills that we are now 
going to fashion into techniques to help you glide through small 
talk like a hot knife through butter. When you master them, you 
will be able—like Donnie—to melt the heart of everyone you 
touch. 

The goal of How to Talk to Anyone is not, of course, to make 
you a small-talk whiz and stop there. The aim is to make you a 
dynamic conversationalist and forceful communicator. However, 
small talk is the first crucial step toward that goal. 




How to Start Great 
Small Talk 


You’ve been there. You’re introduced to someone at a party or busi¬ 
ness meeting. You shake hands, your eyes meet. . . and suddenly 
your entire body of knowledge dries up and thought processes 
come to a screeching halt. You fish for a topic to fill the awkward 
silence. Failing, your new contact slips away in the direction of the 
cheese tray. 

We want the first words falling from our lips to be sparkling, 
witty, and insightful. We want our listeners to immediately rec¬ 
ognize how riveting we are. I was once at a gathering where every¬ 
body was sparkling, witty, insightful, and riveting. It drove me 
berserk because most of these same everybodies felt they had to 
prove it in their first ten words or less! 

Several years ago, the Mensa organization, a social group of 
extremely bright individuals who score in the country’s top 2 per¬ 
cent in intelligence, invited me to be a keynote speaker at their 
annual convention. Their cocktail party was in full swing in the 
lobby of the hotel as I arrived. After checking in, I hauled my bags 
through the hoard of happy-hour Mensans to the elevator. The 
doors separated and I stepped into an elevator packed with party 
goers. As we began the journey up to our respective floors, the ele¬ 
vator gave several sleepy jerks. 


47 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



48 How to Talk to Anyone 


“Hmm,” I remarked, in response to the elevator’s sluggish¬ 
ness, “the elevator seems a little flaky.” Suddenly, each elevator 
occupant, feeling compelled to exhibit his or her 132-plus IQ, 
pounced forth with a thunderous explanation. “It’s obviously got 
poor rail-guide alignment,” announced one. “The relay contact is 
not made up,” declared another. Suddenly I felt like a grasshop¬ 
per trapped in a stereo speaker. I couldn’t wait to escape the attack 
of the mental giants. 

Afterward, in the solitude of my room, I thought back and 
reflected that the Mensans’ answers were, indeed, interesting. Why 
then did I have an adverse reaction? I realized it was too much, 
too soon. I was tired. Their high energy and intensity jarred my 
sluggish state. 

You see, small talk is not about facts or words. It’s about music, 
about melody. Small talk is about putting people at ease. It’s about 
making comforting noises together like cats purring, children 
humming, or groups chanting. You must first match your listener’s 
mood. 

Like repeating the note on the music teacher’s harmonica, top 
communicators pick up on their listener’s tone of voice and dupli¬ 
cate it. Instead of jumping in with such intensity, the Mensans 
could have momentarily matched my lethargic mood by saying, 
“Yes, it is slow, isn’t it?” Had they then prefaced their information 
with, “Have you ever been curious why an elevator is slow?” I 
would have responded with a sincere “Yes, I have.” After a moment 
of equalized energy levels, I would have welcomed their explana¬ 
tions about the rail-guard alignment or whatever the heck it was. 
And friendships might have started. 

I’m sure you’ve suffered the aggression of a mood mismatch. 
Have you ever been relaxing when some overexcited, hot-breathed 
colleague starts pounding you with questions? Or the reverse: 
you’re late, rushing to a meeting, when an associate stops you and 
starts lazily narrating a long, languorous story. No matter how 
interesting the tale, you don’t want to hear it now. 



How to Start Great Small Talk 49 


The first step in starting a conversation without strangling it 
is to match your listener’s mood, if only for a sentence or two. 
When it comes to small talk, think music, not words. Is your lis¬ 
tener adagio or allegro? Match that pace. I call it “Make a Mood 
Match.” 

Matching Their Mood Can Make 
or Break the Sale 

Matching customers’ moods is crucial for salespeople. Some years 
ago, I decided to throw a surprise party for my best friend Stella. 
It was going to be a triple-whammy party because she was cele¬ 
brating three events. One, it was Stella’s birthday. Two, she was 
newly engaged. And three, Stella had just landed her dream job. 
She had been my buddy since grade school, and I was floating on 
air over her birthday-engagement-congratulations bash. 

I had heard one of the best French restaurants in town had an 
attractive back room for parties. About 5 p.m. one afternoon, I 
wafted happily into the restaurant and found the seated maitre d’ 
languidly looking over his reservation book. I began excitedly bab¬ 
bling about Stella’s triple-whammy celebration and asked to see 
that fabulous back room I’d heard so much about. Without a smile 
or moving a muscle, he said, “Zee room ees een zee back. You can 
go zee eet eef you like.” 

CRAST 1 . What a party pooper! His morose mood kicked all 
the party spirit out of me, and I no longer wanted to rent his stu¬ 
pid space. Before I even looked at the room, he lost the rental. I 
left his restaurant vowing to find a place where the management 
would at least appear to share the joy of the happy occasion. 

Every mother knows this instinctively. To quiet a whimpering 
infant, Mama doesn’t just shake her finger and shout, “Quiet 
down.” No, Mama picks baby up. Mama cries, “Ooh, ooh, oh,” 
sympathetically matching baby’s misery for a few moments. Mama 
then gradually transitions the two of them into hush-hush happy 



50 How to Talk to Anyone 


sounds. Your listeners are all big babies! Match their mood if you 
want them to stop crying, start buying, or otherwise come ’round 
to your way of thinking. 




ECHNIQUE #IO 

Make a Mood Match 


Before opening your mouth, take a “voice sample” of 
your listener to detect his or her state of mind. Take a 
“psychic photograph” of the expression to see if your 
listener looks buoyant, bored, or blitzed. If you ever 
want to bring people around to your thoughts, you 
must match their mood and voice tone, if only for a 
moment. 



II How to Sound Like 
You’ve Got a Super 
Personality (No Matter 
What You’re Saying!) 


Once while at a party, I spotted a fellow surrounded by a fan club 
of avid listeners. The chap was smiling, gesticulating, and obvi¬ 
ously enthralling his audience. I went over to hearken to this fas¬ 
cinating speaker. I joined his throng of admirers and eavesdropped 
for a minute or two. Suddenly, it dawned on me: the fellow was 
saying the most banal things! His script was dull, dull, dull. Ah, 
but he was delivering his prosaic observations with such passion, 
and therefore, he held the group spellbound. It convinced me that 
it’s not all what you say, it’s how you say it. 

“What’s a Good Opening Line When 
I Meet People?” 

I am often asked this question, and I give them the same answer 
a woman who once worked in my office always gave me. Dottie 
often stayed at her desk to work through lunch. Sometimes, as I 
was leaving for the sandwich shop, I’d ask her, “Hey Dottie, what 
can I bring you back for lunch?” 


Si 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



5-2 How to Talk to Anyone 


Dottie, trying to be obliging, would say, “Oh anything is fine 
with me.” 

“No, Dottie!” I wanted to scream. “Tell me what you want. 
Ham ’n’ cheese on rye? Bologna on whole wheat, hold the mayo? 
Peanut butter ’n’ jelly with sliced bananas? Be specific. ‘Anything’ 
is a hassle.” 

Frustrating though it may be, my answer to the opening-line 
question is “Anything!” because almost anything you say really is 
OK—as long as it puts people at ease and sounds passionate. 

How do you put people at ease? By convincing them they are 
OK and that the two of you are similar. When you do that, you 
break down walls of fear, suspicion, and mistrust. 


Why Banal Makes a Bond 

Samuel I. Hayakawa was a college president, U.S. senator, and 
brilliant linguistic analyst of Japanese origin. He tells us this story 
that shows the value of, as he says, “unoriginal remarks.” 11 

In early 1943—after the attack on Pearl Harbor at a time when 
there were rumors of Japanese spies—Hayakawa had to wait sev¬ 
eral hours in a railroad station in Oshkosh, Wisconsin. He noticed 
others waiting in the station were staring at him suspiciously. 
Because of the war, they were apprehensive about his presence. He 
later wrote, “One couple with a small child was staring with spe¬ 
cial uneasiness and whispering to each other.” 

So what did Hayakawa do? He made unoriginal remarks to 
set them at ease. He said to the husband that it was too bad the 
train should be late on so cold a night. The man agreed. 

“I went on,” Hayakawa wrote, “to remark that it must be espe¬ 
cially difficult to travel with a small child in winter when train 
schedules were so uncertain. Again the husband agreed. I then 
asked the child’s age and remarked that their child looked very big 



How to Sound Like You’ve Got a Super Personality 53 


and strong for his age. Again agreement, this time with a slight 
smile. The tension was relaxing.” 

After two or three more exchanges, the man asked Hayakawa, 
“I hope you don’t mind my bringing it up, but you’re Japanese, aren’t 
you? Do you think the Japs have any chance of winning this war?” 

“Well,” Hayakawa replied, “your guess is as good as mine. I 
don’t know any more than I read in the papers. But the way I fig¬ 
ure it, I don’t see how the Japanese, with their lack of coal and 
steel and oil . . . can ever beat a powerfully industrialized nation 
like the United States.” 

Hayakawa went on, “My remark was admittedly neither orig¬ 
inal nor well informed. Hundreds of radio commentators . . . were 
saying much the same thing during those weeks. But just because 
they were, the remark sounded familiar and was on the right side 
so that it was easy to agree with.” 

The Wisconsin man agreed at once with what seemed like 
genuine relief. His next remark was, “Say, I hope your folks aren’t 
over there while the war is going on.” 

“Yes, they are,” Hayakawa replied. “My father and mother and 
two young sisters are over there.” 

“Do you ever hear from them?” the man asked. 

“How can I?” Hayakawa answered. 

Both the man and his wife looked troubled and sympathetic. 
“Do you mean you won’t be able to see them or hear from them 
until after the war is over?” 

There was more to the conversation but the result was, within 
ten minutes they had invited Hayakawa—whom they initially may 
have suspected was a Japanese spy—to visit them sometime in 
their city and have dinner in their home. And all because of this 
brilliant scholar’s admittedly common and unoriginal small talk. 
Top communicators know the most soothing and appropriate first 
words should be, like Senator Hayakawa’s, unoriginal, even banal. 



54 How to Talk to Anyone 


But not indifferent. Hayakawa delivered his sentiments with sin¬ 
cerity and passion. 


Ascent from Banality 

It is not necessary, of course, to stay with mundane remarks. If 
you find your company displays cleverness or wit, you match that. 
The conversation then escalates naturally, compatibly. Don’t rush 
it or, like the Mensans, you seem like you’re showing off. The bot¬ 
tom line on your first words is to have the courage of your own 
triteness. Because, remember, people tune in to your tone more 
than your text. 


4 ^ 


ECHNIQUE #11 

Prosaic with Passion 


Worried about your first words? Fear not, because 80 
percent of your listener’s impression has nothing to do 
with your words anyway. Almost anything you say at 
first is fine. No matter how prosaic the text, an 
empathetic mood, a positive demeanor, and passionate 
delivery make you sound exciting. 


“Anything, Except Liverwurst!” 

Back to Dottie waiting for her sandwich at her desk. Sometimes 
as I walked out the door scratching my head wondering what to 
bring her, she’d call after me, “Anything, except liverwurst, that 
is.” Thanks, Dottie, that’s a little bit of help. 

Here’s my “anything, except liverwurst” on small talk. Any¬ 
thing you say is fine as long as it is not complaining, rude, or 



How to Sound Like You’ve Got a Super Personality 55 


unpleasant. If the first words out of your mouth are a complaint— 
BLAM—people label you a complainer. Why? Because that com¬ 
plaint is your new acquaintance’s too percent sampling of you so 
far. You could be the happiest Pollyanna ever, but how will they 
know? If your first comment is a complaint, you’re a griper. If your 
first words are rude, you’re a creep. If your first words are unpleas¬ 
ant, you’re a stinker. Open and shut. 

Other than these downers, anything goes. Ask them where 
they’re from, how they know the host of the party, where they 
bought the lovely suit they’re wearing—or hundreds of etceteras. 
The trick is to ask your prosaic question with passion to get the 
other person talking. 

Still feel a bit shaky on making the approach to strangers? Let’s 
take a quick detour on our road to meaningful communicating. 
I’ll give you three quickie techniques to meet people at parties— 
then nine more to make small talk not so small. 



12 How to Make People 
Want to Start a 
Conversation with You 


Singles proficient at meeting potential sweethearts without the 
benefit of introduction (in the vernacular, making a “pickup”), 
have developed a deliciously devious technique that works equally 
well for social or corporate networking purposes. The technique 
requires no exceptional skill on your part, only the courage to 
sport a simple visual prop called a “Whatzit.” 

What’s a Whatzit? A Whatzit is anything you wear or carry 
that is unusual—a unique pin, an interesting purse, a strange tie, 
or an amusing hat. A Whatzit is any object that draws people’s 
attention and inspires them to approach you and ask, “Uh, what’s 
that?” Your Whatzit can be as subtle or overt as your personality 
and the occasion permit. 

I wear around my neck an outmoded pair of glasses that resem¬ 
bles a double monocle. Often the curious have approached me at a 
gathering and asked, “Whatzit?” I explain it’s a lorgnette left to me 
by my grandmother, which, of course, paves the way to discuss 
hatred of glasses, aging eyes, love or loss of grandmothers, adora¬ 
tion of antique jewelry—anywhere the inquisitor wants to take it. 

Perhaps, unknowingly, you have fallen prey to this soon-to- 
be-legendary technique. At a gathering, have you ever noticed 


56 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



Hoiv to Make People Want to Start a Conversation with Yon $7 


someone you would like to talk to? Then you’ve racked your brain 
to conjure an excuse to make the approach. What a bounty it was 
to discover that he or she was wearing some weird, wild, or won¬ 
derful something you could comment on. 


The Whatzit Way to Love 

Your Whatzit is a social aid whether you seek business rewards or 
new romance. My friend Alexander carries Greek worry beads 
with him wherever he goes. He’s not worried. He knows any 
woman who wants to talk to him will come up and say, “What’s 
that?” 

Think about it, gentlemen. Suppose you’re at a party. An 
attractive woman spots you across the room. She wants to talk to 
you but she’s thinking, “Well, Mister, you’re attractive. But, golly, 
what can I say to you? You just ain’t got no Whatzit.” 


Be a Whatzit Seeker, Too 

Likewise, become proficient in scrutinizing the apparel of those 
you wish to approach. Why not express interest in the handker¬ 
chief in the tycoon’s vest pocket, the brooch on the bosom of the 
rich divorcee, or the school ring on the finger of the CEO whose 
company you want to work for? 

The big spender who, you suspect, might buy a hundred of 
your widgets has a tiny golf-club lapel pin? Say, “Excuse me, I 
couldn’t help but notice your attractive lapel pin. Are you a golfer? 
Me, too. What courses have you played?” 

Your business cards and your Whatzit are crucial socializing 
artifacts. Whether you are riding in the elevator, climbing the 
doorstep, or traversing the path to the party, make sure your 
Whatzit is hanging out for all to see. 



58 How to Talk to Anyone 


2ji 


ECHNIQUE #12 

Always Wear a Whatzit 


Whenever you go to a gathering, wear or carry 
something unusual to give people who find you the 
delightful stranger across the crowded room an excuse 
to approach. “Excuse me, I couldn’t help but notice 
your . . . what IS that?” 


The next quickie technique was originated by doggedly de¬ 
termined politicians who don’t let one partygoer escape if they 
think he or she could be helpful to their campaigns. I call it the 
“Whoozat” technique. 



i3 How to Meet the 
People You Want 
to Meet 


Say you have scrutinized the body of the important business con¬ 
tact you want to meet. You’ve searched in vain from the tip of his 
cowlick to the toes of his boots. He’s not sporting a single Whatzit. 

If you strike out on finding something to comment on, resort 
to the Whoozat technique. Like a persistent politician, go to the 
party giver and say, “That man/woman over there looks interest¬ 
ing. Who is he/she?” Then ask for an introduction. Don’t be hes¬ 
itant. The party giver will be pleased you find one of the guests 
interesting. 

If, however, you are loath to pull the party giver away from 
his or her other guests, you still can perform Whoozat. This time, 
don’t ask for a formal introduction. Simply pump the party giver 
for just enough information to launch you. Find out about the 
stranger’s jobs, interests, and hobbies. 

Suppose the party giver says, “Oh, that’s Joe Smith. I’m not 
sure what his job is, but I know he loves to ski.” Aha, you’ve just 
been given the icebreaker you need. Now you make a beeline for 
Joe Smith. “Hi, you’re Joe Smith, aren’t you? Susan was just telling 
me what a great skier you are. Where do you ski?” You get the 
idea. 


59 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



60 How to Talk to Anyone 


th 


ECHNIQUE #13 

Whoozat 


Whoozat is the most effective, least used (by non¬ 
politicians) meeting-people device ever contrived. 
Simply ask the party giver to make the introduction, or 
pump for a few facts that you can immediately turn 
into icebreakers. 


Now the third in our little trio of meeting-who-you-want 
tricks. 




How to Break into a 
Tight Crowd 


The woman you’ve decided you MUST meet is wearing no 
Whatzit? Can’t find the host for the Whoozat technique? To make 
matters worse, she’s deep in conversation with a group of her 
friends. Seems quite hopeless that you will maneuver a meeting, 
doesn’t it? You can’t just say, “Excuse me, I just thought I’d eaves¬ 
drop in and say ‘Hello.’ ” 

No obstacle blocks the resolute politician, who always has a 
trick or ten up his or her sleeve. A politico would resort to the 
“Eavesdrop In” technique. Eavesdropping, of course, conjures 
images of clandestine activities—wiretapping, Watergate break- 
ins, or spies skulking around in the murky shadows. Eavesdrop¬ 
ping has historical precedent with politicians so, in a pinch, it 
naturally comes to mind. 

At parties, stand near the group of people you wish to infil¬ 
trate. Then wait for a word or two you can use as a wedge to break 
into the group. “Excuse me, I couldn’t help overhearing that you 
. . .” and then whatever is relevant here. For example “I couldn’t 
help overhearing your discussion of Bermuda. I’m going there next 
month for the first time. Any suggestions?” 

Now you are in the circle and can direct your comments to 
your intended. 


61 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



62 How to Talk to Anyone 


4 * 


ECHNIQUE #14 

Eavesdrop In 


No Whatzit? No host for Whoozat? No problem! Just 
sidle up behind the swarm of folks you want to infil¬ 
trate and open your ears. Wait for any flimsy excuse 
and jump in with “Excuse me, I couldn’t help but 
overhear. ...” 

Will they be taken aback? Momentarily. 

Will they get over it? Momentarily. 

Will you be in the conversation? Absolutely! 


Let us now hop back on the train that first explored Small Talk 
City and travel to the land of Meaningful Communicating. 



is How to Make “Where 
Are You From?” 
Sound Exciting 


You wouldn’t dream of going to a party naked. And I hope you 
wouldn’t dream of letting your conversation be exposed naked and 
defenseless against the two inevitable assaults “Where are you 
from?” and “What do you do?” 

When asked these questions, most people, like clunking a fro¬ 
zen steak on a china platter, drop a brick of frozen geography or 
baffling job title on the asker’s conversational platter. Then they 
slap on the muzzle. 

You’re at a convention. Everyone you meet will, of course, ask 
“And where are you from?” When you give them the short-form 
naked-city answer “Oh, I’m from Muscatine, Iowa” (or Milli- 
nocket, Maine; Winnemucca, Nevada; or anywhere they haven’t 
heard of), what can you expect except a blank stare? Even if you’re 
a relatively big city slicker from Denver, Colorado; Detroit, Michi¬ 
gan; or San Diego, California, you’ll receive a panicked look from 
all but American history professors. They’re rapidly racking their 
brains thinking “What do I say next?” Even the names of world- 
class burgs like New York, Chicago, Washington, and Los Ange¬ 
les inspire less-than-riveting responses. When I tell people I’m 
from New York City, what are they expected to say? “Duh, seen 
any good muggings lately?” 


63 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



64 How to Talk to Anyone 


Do humanity and yourself a favor. Never, ever, give just a one- 
sentence response to the question, “Where are you from?” Give the 
asker some fuel for his tank, some fodder for his trough. Give the hun¬ 
gry communicator something to conversationally nibble on. All it 
takes is an extra sentence or two about your city—some interesting 
fact, some witty observation—to hook the asker into the conversation. 

Several months ago, a trade association invited me to be its 
keynote speaker on networking and teaching people to be better 
conversationalists. Just before my speech, I was introduced to Mrs. 
Devlin, who was the head of the association. 

“How do you do?” she asked. 

“How do you do?” I replied. 

Then Mrs. Devlin smiled, anxiously awaiting a sample of my 
stimulating conversational expertise. I asked her where she was 
from. She plunked a frozen “Columbus, Ohio” and a big expectant 
grin on my platter. I had to quickly thaw her answer into digestible 
conversation. My mind thrashed into action. Leifs thought pat¬ 
tern: “Gulp, Columbus, Ohio. I’ve never been there, hmm. Crim- 
iny, what do I know about Columbus? I know a fellow named Jeff, 
a successful speaker who lives there. But Columbus is too big to 
ask if she knows him . . . and besides only kids play the ‘Do-you- 
know-so-and-so’ game.” My panicked silent search continued. “I 
think it’s named after Christopher Columbus . .. but I’m not sure, 
so I better keep my mouth shut on that one.” Four or five other 
possibilities raced through my mind but I rejected them all as too 
obvious, too adolescent, or too off-the-wall. 

I realized by now that seconds had passed, and Mrs. Devlin 
was still standing there with a slowly dissipating smile on her face. 
She was waiting for me (the “expert” who, within the hour, was 
expected to teach her trade association lessons on scintillating con¬ 
versation) to spew forth words of wit or wisdom. 

“Oh, Columbus, gee,” I mumbled in desperation, watching 
her face fall into the worried expression of a patient being asked 
by the surgeon, knife poised in hand, “Where’s your appendix?” 



How to Make “Where Are You From?” Sound Exciting 65 


I never came up with stimulating conversation on Columbus. 
But, just then, under the knife, I created the following technique 
for posterity. I call it “Never the Naked City.” 


Zb 


ECHNIQUE #15 

Never the Naked City 


Whenever someone asks you the inevitable, “And where 
are you from?” never, ever, unfairly challenge their 
powers of imagination with a one-word answer. 

Learn some engaging facts about your hometown 
that conversational partners can comment on. Then, 
when they say something clever in response to your 
bait, they think you’re a great conversationalist. 


Different Bait for Shrimp or Sharks 

A fisherman uses different bait to bag bass or bluefish. And you 
will obviously throw out different conversational bait to snag sim¬ 
ple shrimp or sophisticated sharks. Your hook should relate to the 
type of person you’re speaking with. I’m originally from Wash¬ 
ington, D.C. If someone at, say, an art gallery asked me where I 
was from, I might answer “Washington, D.C.—designed, you 
know, by the same city planner who designed Paris.” This opens 
the conversational possibilities to the artistry of city planning, 
Paris, other cities’ plans, European travel, and so forth. 

At a social party of singles I’d opt for another answer. “I’m 
from Washington, D.C. The reason I left is there were seven 
women to every man when I was growing up.” Now the conver¬ 
sation can turn to the ecstasy or agony of being single, the per¬ 
ceived lack of desirable men everywhere, or even flirtatious 
possibilities. 



66 How to Talk to Anyone 


In a political group, I’d cast a current fact from the constantly 
evolving political face of Washington. No need to speculate on the 
multitude of conversational possibilities that unlocks. 

Where do you get your conversational bait? Start by phoning 
the chamber of commerce or historical society of your town. 
Search the World Wide Web and click on your town, or open an 
old-fashioned encyclopedia—all rich sources for future stimulat¬ 
ing conversations. Learn some history, geography, business statis¬ 
tics, or perhaps a few fun facts to tickle future friends’ funny 
bones. 

The Devlin debacle inspired further research. The minute I 
got home, I called the Columbus chamber of commerce and the 
historical society. Say you, too, are from Columbus, Ohio, and 
your new acquaintance lays it on you: “Where are you from?” 
When you are talking with a businessperson, your answer could 
be, “I’m from Columbus, Ohio. You know many major corpora¬ 
tions do their product testing in Columbus because it’s so com¬ 
mercially typical. In fact, it’s been called ‘the most American city 
in America.’ They say if it booms or bombs in Columbus, it 
booms or bombs nationally.” 

Talking with someone with a German last name? Tell her 
about Columbus’s historic German Village with the brick streets 
and the wonderful i850s-style little houses. It’s bound to inspire 
stories of the old country. Your conversation partner’s surname is 
Italian? Tell him Genoa, Italy, is Columbus’s sister city. 

Talking with an American history buff? Tell him that Colum¬ 
bus was, indeed, named after Christopher Columbus and that a 
replica of the Santa Maria is anchored in the Scioto River. Talk¬ 
ing with a student? Tell her about the five universities in Columbus. 

The possibilities continue. You suspect your conversation part¬ 
ner has an artistic bent? “Ah,” you throw out casually, “Columbus 
is the home of artist George Bellows.” 

Columbusites, prepare some tasty snacks for askers even if 
you know nothing about them. Here’s a goodie. Tell them you 



How to Make “Where Are You From?”Sound. Exciting 6y 


always have to say “Columbus, Ohio” because there is also a Co¬ 
lumbus, Arkansas; Columbus, Georgia; Columbus, Indiana; 
Columbus, Kansas; Columbus, Kentucky; Columbus, Mississippi; 
Columbus, Montana; Columbus, Nebraska; Columbus, New Jer¬ 
sey; Columbus, New Mexico; Columbus, North Carolina; Colum¬ 
bus, North Dakota; Columbus, Pennsylvania; Columbus, Texas; 
and Columbus, Wisconsin. That spreads the conversational possi¬ 
bilities to fifteen other states. Remember, as a quotable notable once 
said, “No man would listen to you talk if he didn’t know it was his 
turn next.” 

A postscript to the hellish experience I had with Columbus. 
Months later, I mentioned the trauma to my speaker friend from 
Columbus, Jeff. Jeff explained his house was really in a smaller 
town just minutes outside Columbus. 

“What town, Jeff?” 

“Gahanna, Ohio. Gahanna means ‘hell’ in Hebrew,” he said, 
and then went on to explain why he thought ancient Hebrew his¬ 
torians were clairvoyant. 

Thanks, Jeff, I knew you’d never lay a naked city on any of 
your listeners. 



rf How to Come Out a 
Winner Every Time 
They Ask, “And What 
Do You Do?” 

Third only to death and taxes is the assurance a new acquaintance 
will soon chirp, “And what do you do?” (Is it fitting and proper 
they should make that query? We’ll pick up that sticky wicket 
later.) For the moment, these few defensive moves help you keep 
your crackerjack communicator credentials when asked the 
inevitable question. 

First, like Never the Naked City, don’t toss a short-shrift 
answer in response to the asker’s breathless inquiry. You leave the 
poor fish flopping on the deck when you just say your title: “I’m 
an actuary/an auditor/an author/an astrophysicist.” Have mercy 
so he or she doesn’t feel like a nincompoop outsider asking, “What, 
er, kind of actuizing (auditing, authoring, or astrophysizing) do 
you do?” 

You’re an attorney. Don’t leave it to laymen to try to figure out 
what you really do. Flesh it out. Tell a little story your conversa¬ 
tion partner can get a handle on. For example, if you’re talking 
with a young mother say, “I’m an attorney. Our firm specializes in 
employment law. In fact, now I’m involved in a case where a com- 

68 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Come Out a Winner Every Time They Ask, “And What Do You Do?” 69 


-V. 


ECHNIQUE #l6 

Never the Naked Job 


When asked the inevitable “And what do you do,” you 
may think “I’m an economist/an educator/an engineer” 
is giving enough information to engender good 
conversation. However, to one who is not an economist, 
educator, or an engineer, you might as well be saying 
“I’m a paleontologist/psychoanalyst/pornographer.” 

Flesh it out. Throw out some delicious facts about 
your job for new acquaintances to munch on. 
Otherwise, they’ll soon excuse themselves, preferring 
the snacks back at the cheese tray. 


pany actually discharged a woman for taking extra maternity leave 
that was a medical necessity.” A mother can relate to that. 

Talking with a business owner? Say “I’m an attorney. Our firm 
specializes in employment law. My current case concerns an 
employer who is being sued by one of her staff for asking personal 
questions during the initial job interview.” A business owner can 
relate to that. 


Painful Memories of Naked Job Flashers 

I still harbor painful recollections of being tongue-tied when con¬ 
fronted by naked job flashers. Like the time a fellow at a dinner 
party told me, “I’m a nuclear scientist.” My weak “Oh, that must 
be fascinating” reduced me to a mental molecule in his eyes. 

The chap on my other side announced, “I’m in industrial abra¬ 
sives,” and then paused, waiting for me to be impressed. My “Well, 
er, golly, you must have to be a shrewd judge of character to be in 



jo How to Talk to Anyone 


industrial abrasives” didn’t fly either. We three sat in silence the 
rest of the meal. 

Just last month a new acquaintance bragged, “I’m planning to 
teach Tibetan Buddhism at Truckee Meadows Community Col¬ 
lege,” and then clammed up. I knew less about Truckee Meadows 
than I did about Tibetan Buddhism. Whenever people ask you 
what you do, give them some mouth-to-ear resuscitation so they 
can catch their breath and say something. 



j 7 How to Introduce People 
Like the Host(ess) with 
the Most(est) 


It is important to help “newlymets” through their first nervous 
moments. 

“Susan, I’d like you to meet John Smith. John, this is Susan 
Jones.” Duh, what do you expect John and Susan to say? 

“Smith? Umm, that’s S-M-I-T-H, isn’t it?” 

“Uh, er, golly, Susan, well, now, there’s an interesting name.” 

Nice-try-forget-it. Don’t blame John or Susan for being less 
than scintillating. The fault lies with the person who introduced 
the two the way most people introduce their friends to each 
other—with naked names. They cast out a line with no bait for 
people to sink their teeth into. 

Big winners may not talk a lot, but conversation never dies 
unwillingly in their midst. They make sure of it with techniques 
like “Never the Naked Introduction.” When they introduce peo¬ 
ple, they buy an insurance policy on the conversation with a few 
simple add-ons: “Susan, I’d like you to meet John. John has a won¬ 
derful boat we took a trip on last summer. John, this is Susan 
Smith. Susan is editor in chief of Shoestring Gourmet magazine.” 

Padding the introduction gives Susan the opportunity to ask 
what kind of boat John has or where the group went. It gives John 
an opening to discuss his love of writing. Or of cooking. Or of 


7i 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



72 How to Talk to Anyone 


food. The conversation can then naturally expand to travel in gen¬ 
eral, life on boats, past vacations, favorite recipes, restaurants, bud¬ 
gets, diets, magazines, editorial policy—to infinity. 




ECHNIQUE #17 

Never the Naked Introduction 


When introducing people, don’t throw out an unbaited 
hook and stand there grinning like a big clam, leaving 
the newlymets to flutter their fins and fish for a topic. 
Bait the conversational hook to get them in the swim of 
things. Then you’re free to stay or float on to the next 
networking opportunity. 


If you’re not comfortable mentioning someone’s job during 
the introduction, mention their hobby or even a talent. The other 
day at a gathering, the hostess introduced a man named Gilbert. 
She said, “Leil, I’d like you to meet Gilbert. Gilbert’s gift is sculpt¬ 
ing. He makes beautiful wax carvings.” I remember thinking, 
“ Gift —now that’s a lovely way to introduce someone and induce 
conversation.” 

Armed with these two personality enhancers, three conversa¬ 
tion igniters, and three small extenders, it is time to take a step up 
the communications ladder. Let us now rise from small talk and 
seek the path to more meaningful dialogue. The next technique 
is guaranteed to make the exchange engrossing for your conversa¬ 
tion partner. 




How to Resuscitate a 
Dying Conversation 


Even a well-intentioned husband who might ask his wife while 
making love, “Is it good for you, too, Honey?” knows not to ask 
a colleague, “Is the conversation good for you, too?” Yet he won¬ 
ders ... we all do. With the following technique, set your mind 
at rest. You can definitely make the conversation hot for anyone 
with whom you speak. Like my prom date, Donnie, you will 
miraculously find subjects to engross your listeners. 


Be a Sleuth on Their Slips of the Tongue 

No matter how elusive the clue, Sherlock Holmes is confident he’ll 
soon be staring right at it through his magnifying glass. Like 
the unerring detective, big winners know, no matter how elusive 
the clue, they’ll find the right topic. How? They become word 
detectives. 

I have a young friend, Nancy, who works in a nursing home. 
Nancy cares deeply about the elderly but often grumbles about 
how crotchety and laconic some of her patients are. She laments 
she has difficulty relating to them. 

Nancy told me about one especially cantankerous old woman 
named Mrs. Otis, whom she could never get to open up to her. 


75 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



74 - How to Talk to Anyone 


“One day,” Nancy confided, “right after all those rainstorms we 
had last week, just to make conversation, I remarked to Mrs. Otis, 
‘Terrible storms we had last week, don’t you think?’ Well,” Nancy 
continued, “Mrs. Otis practically jumped down my throat. She 
said in a snippy voice, ‘It’s been good for the plants.’” I asked 
Nancy how she responded to that. 

“What could I say?” Nancy answered. “The woman was obvi¬ 
ously cutting me off.” 

“Did you ever think to ask Mrs. Otis if she liked plants?” 

“Plants?” Nancy asked. 

“Well, yes,” I suggested. “Mrs. Otis brought the subject up.” 
I asked Nancy to do me a favor. “Ask her,” I begged. Nancy re¬ 
sisted, but I persisted. Just to quiet me down, Nancy promised to 
ask “cantankerous old Mrs. Otis” if she liked plants. 

The next day, a flabbergasted Nancy called me from work. 
“Led, how did you know? Not only did Mrs. Otis love plants, but 
she told me she’d been married to a gardener. Today I had a dif¬ 
ferent problem with Mrs. Otis. I couldn’t shut her up! She went 
on and on about her garden, her husband. . . .” 

Top communicators know ideas don’t come out of nowhere. 
If Mrs. Otis thought to bring up plants, then she must have some 
relationship with them. Furthermore, by mentioning the word, it 
meant subconsciously she wanted to talk about plants. 

Suppose, for example, instead of responding to Nancy’s com¬ 
ment about the rain with “It’s good for the plants,” Mrs. Otis had 
said, “Because of the rain, my dog couldn’t go out.” Nancy could 
then ask about her dog. Or suppose she grumbled, “It’s bad for my 
arthritis.” Can you guess what old Mrs. Otis wants to talk about 
now? 

When talking with anyone, keep your ears open and, like a 
good detective, listen for clues. Be on the lookout for any unusual 
references: any anomaly, deviation, digression, or invocation of 



How to Resuscitate a Dying Conversation y$ 


another place, time, person. Ask about it because it’s the clue to 
what your conversation partner would really enjoy discussing. 

If two people have something in common, when the shared 
interest comes up, they jump on it naturally. For example, if some¬ 
one mentions playing squash (bird-watching or stamp collecting) 
and the listener shares that passion, he or she pipes up, “Oh, you’re 
a squasher (or birder or philatelist), too!” 

Here’s the trick: there’s no need to be a squasher, birder, or 
philatelist to pipe up with enthusiasm. You can simply “Be a Word 
Detective.” When you pick up on the reference as though it excites 
you, too, it parlays you into conversation the stranger thrills to. 
(The subject may put your feet to sleep, but that’s another story.) 




ECHNIQUE #l8 

Be a Word Detective 


Like a good gumshoe, listen to your conversation 
partner’s every word for clues to his or her preferred 
topic. The evidence is bound to slip out. Then spring 
on that subject like a sleuth on to a slip of the tongue. 
Like Sherlock Holmes, you have the clue to the subject 
that’s hot for the other person. 


Now that you’ve ignited stimulating conversation, let’s explore 
a technique to keep it hot. 



i9 How to Enthrall ’Em 
with Your Choice of 
Topic-Them! 

Several years ago, a girlfriend and I attended a party saturated with 
a hodgepodge of swellegant folks. Everyone we talked to seemed 
to lead a nifty life. Discussing the party afterward, I asked my 
friend, “Diane, of all the exciting people at the party, who did you 
enjoy talking to most?” 

Without hesitation she said, “Oh by far, Dan Smith.” 

“What does Dan do?” I asked her. 

“Uh, well, I’m not sure,” she answered. 

“Where does he live?” 

“Uh, I don’t know,” Diane responded. 

“Well, what is he interested in?” 

“Well, we really didn’t talk about his interests.” 

“Diane,” I asked, “what did you talk about?” 

“Well, I guess we talked mostly about me.” 

“Aha,” I thought. Diane has just rubbed noses with a winner. 

As it turns out, I had the pleasure of meeting Big-Winner Dan 
several months later. Diane’s ignorance about his life piqued my 
curiosity so I grilled him for details. As it turns out, Dan lives in 
Paris, has a beach home in the south of France, and a mountain 
home in the Alps. He travels around the world producing sound and 
light shows for pyramids and ancient ruins—and he is an avid hang 

76 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Enthrall Em with Your Choice of Topic — Them! 77 


glider and scuba diver. Does this man have an interesting life or 
what? Yet Dan, when meeting Diane, said nothing about himself. 

I told Dan about how pleased Diane was to meet him yet how 
little she learned about his life. Dan simply replied, “Well, when 
I meet someone, I learn so much more if I ask about their life. I 
always try to turn the spotlight on the other p
erson.” Truly con¬ 
fident people often do this. They know they grow more by listen¬ 
ing than talking. Obviously, they also captivate the talker. 


Sell Yourself with a Top Sales Technique 

Several months ago at a speaker’s convention, I was talking with 
a colleague Brian Tracy. Brian does a brilliant job of training top 
salespeople. He tells his students of a giant spotlight that, when 
shining on their product, is not as interesting to the prospect. 
When they shine the spotlight on the prospect, they make the sale. 

Salespeople, this technique is especially crucial for you. Keep 
your “Swiveling Spotlight” aimed away from you, only lightly on 
your product, and most brightly on your buyer. You’ll do a much 
better job of selling yourself and your product. 




ECHNIQUE #19 

The Swiveling Spotlight 


When you meet someone, imagine a giant revolving 
spotlight between you. When you’re talking, the 
spotlight is on you. When the new person is speaking, 
it’s shining on him or her. If you shine it brightly 
enough, the stranger will be blinded to the fact that you 
have hardly said a word about yourself. The longer you 
keep it shining away from you, the more interesting he 
or she finds you. 



20 How to Never Need 
to Wonder, “What Do 
I Say Next?” 


Moments arise, of course, when even conversationalists extraordi¬ 
naire hit the wall. Some folks’ monosyllabic grunts leave slim pick¬ 
ings even for masters of the Be a Word Detective technique. 

If you find yourself futilely fanning the embers of a dying 
conversation (and if you feel for political reasons or human com¬ 
passion that the conversation should continue), here’s a foolproof 
trick to get the fire blazing again. I call it “Parroting” after that 
beautiful tropical bird that captures everyone’s heart simply by 
repeating other people’s words. 

Have you ever, puttering around the house, had the TV in the 
background tuned to a tennis game? You hear the ball going back 
and forth over the net—klink-klunk, klink-klunk, klink . . . this 
time you don’t hear the klunk. The ball didn’t hit the court. What 
happened? You immediately look up at the set. 

Likewise in conversation, the conversational ball goes back and 
forth. First you speak, then your partner speaks, you speak... and 
so it goes, back and forth. Each time, through a series of nods and 
comforting grunts like “um hum,” or “umm,” you let your con¬ 
versation partner know the ball has landed in your court. It’s your 
“I got it” signal. Such is the rhythm of conversation. 


7* 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Never Need to Wonder, “What Do I Say Next?” 79 


“What Do I Say Next?” 

Back to that frightfully familiar moment when it is your turn to 
speak but your mind goes blank. Don’t panic. Instead of signal¬ 
ing verbally or nonverbally that you “got it,” simply repeat—or 
parrot—the last two or three words your companion said, in a 
sympathetic, questioning tone. That throws the conversational ball 
right back in your partner’s court. 

My friend Phil sometimes picks me up at the airport. Usually 
I am so exhausted that I rudely fall asleep in the passenger seat, 
relegating Phil to nothing more than a chauffeur. 

After one especially exhausting trip some years ago, I flung 
my bags in his trunk and flopped onto the front seat. As I was 
dozing off, he mentioned he’d gone to the theater the night before. 
Usually I would have just grunted and wafted into unconscious¬ 
ness. However, on this particular trip, I had learned the Par¬ 
roting technique and was eager to try it. “Theater?” I parroted 
quizzically. 

“Yes, it was a great show,” he replied, fully expecting it to be 
the last word on the subject before I fell into my usual sleepy 
stupor. 

“Great show?” I parroted. Pleasantly surprised by my interest, 
he said, “Yes, it’s a new show by Stephen Sondheim called Sweeney 
Todd.” 

“Sweeney Todd ?” I again parroted. Now Phil was getting fired 
up. “Yeah, great music and an unbelievably bizarre story. . . .” 

“Bizarre story?” I parroted. Well, that’s all Phil needed. For 
the next half an hour, Phil told me the show’s story about a Lon¬ 
don barber who went around murdering people. I half dozed, but 
soon decided his tale of Sweeney Todd’s cutting off peoples’ heads 
was disturbing my sleepy reverie. So I simply backed up and par¬ 
roted one of his previous phrases to get him on another track. 

“You said it had great music?” 



80 How to Talk to Anyone 


That did the trick. For the rest of the forty-five-minute trip to 
my home, Phil sang me “Pretty Women,” “The Best Pies in Lon¬ 
don,” and other songs from Sweeney Todd —much better accom¬ 
paniment for my demi-nap. I’m sure, to this day, Phil thinks of 
that trip as one of the best conversations we ever had. And all I did 
was parrot a few of his phrases. 


-V 


ECHNIQUE 


#20 


Parroting 


Never be left speechless again. Like a parrot, simply 
repeat the last few words your conversation partner 
says. That puts the ball right back in his or her court, 
and then all you need to do is listen. 


Salespeople, why go on a wild goose chase for a customer’s real 
objections when it’s so easy to shake them out of the trees with 
Parroting? 


Parroting Your Way to Profits 

Parroting is also a can opener to pry open people’s real feelings. 
Star salespeople use it to get to their prospect’s emotional objec¬ 
tions, which they often don’t even articulate to themselves. A 
friend of mine, Paul, a used-car salesman, told me he credits a 
recent sale of a Lamborghini to Parroting. 

Paul was walking around the lot with a prospect and his wife, 
who had expressed interest in a “sensible car.” He was showing 
them every sensible Chevy and Ford on the lot. As they were look¬ 
ing at one very sensible family car, Paul asked the husband what 
he thought of it. “Well,” he mused, “I’m not sure this car is right 



How to Never Need to Wonder, “What Do I Say Next?” 81 


for me.” Instead of moving on to the next sensible car, Paul par¬ 
roted “Right for you?” Paul’s questioning inflection signaled the 
prospect that he needed to say more. 

“Well, er, yeah,” the prospect mumbled. “I’m not sure it fits 
my personality.” 

“Fits your personality?” Paul again parroted. 

“You know, maybe I need something a little more sporty.” 

“A little more sporty?” Paul parroted. 

“Well, those cars over there look a little more sporty.” 

Aha! Paul’s parrot had ferreted out which cars to show the cus¬ 
tomer. As they walked over toward a Lamborghini on the lot, Paul 
saw the prospect’s eyes light up. An hour later, Paul had pocketed 
a fat commission. 

Want to take a rest from talking to save your throat? This next 
technique gets your conversation partner off and running so all 
you have to do is listen (or even sneak off unnoticed as he or she 
chats congenially away). 



2 l How to Get’Em Happily 
(hatting (So You (an Slip 
Away if You Want To!) 


Every father smiles when his little tyke beseeches him at bedtime, 
“Daddy, Daddy, tell me the story again of the three little pigs” (or 
the dancing princesses or how you and Mommy met). Daddy 
knows Junior enjoyed the story so much the first time, he wants 
to hear it again and again. 

Junior inspires the following technique called “Encore!” which 
serves two purposes. Encore! makes a colleague feel like a hap¬ 
py dad, and it’s a great way to give dying conversation a heart 
transplant. 

I once worked on a ship that had Italian officers and mostly 
American passengers. Each week, the deck officers were required 
to attend the captain’s cocktail party. After the captain’s address 
in charmingly broken English, the officers invariably clumped 
together yakking it up in Italian. Needless to say, most of the pas¬ 
sengers’ grasp of Italian ended at macaroni, spaghetti, salami, and 
pizza. 

As cruise director, it fell on my shoulders to get the officers to 
mingle with the passengers. My not-so-subtle tactic was to grab 
one of the officers’ arms and literally drag him over to a smiling 
throng of expectant passengers. I would then introduce the offi¬ 
cer and pray that either the cat would release his tongue, or a pas- 


82 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Get ’Em Happily Chattmg (So You Can Slip Away if You Want To!) 83 


senger would come up with a more original question than “Gee, 
if all you officers are here, who is driving the boat?” Never hap¬ 
pened. I dreaded the weekly captain’s cocktail party. 

One night, sleeping in my cabin, I was awakened by the ship 
rocking violently from side to side. I listened and the engines were 
off. A bad sign. I grabbed my robe and raced up to the deck. 
Through the dense fog, I could barely discern another ship not 
half a mile from us. Five or six officers were grasping the starboard 
guardrail and leaning overboard. I rushed over just in time to see 
a man in the moonlight with a bandage over one eye struggling 
up our violently rocking ladder. The officers immediately whisked 
him off to our ship’s hospital. The engines started again and we 
were on our way. 

The next morning I got the full story. A laborer on the other 
ship, a freighter, had been drilling a hole in an engine cylinder. 
While he was working, a sharp, needle-thin piece of metal shot 
like a missile into his right eye. The freighter had no doctor on 
board so the ship broadcast an emergency signal. 

International sea laws dictate that any ship hearing a distress 
signal must respond. Our ship came to the rescue and the seaman, 
clutching his bleeding eye, was lowered into a lifeboat that brought 
him to our ship. Dr. Rossi, our ship’s doctor, was successfully able 
to remove the needle from the workman’s eye, thus saving his 
eyesight. 

“Tell ’Em About the Time You ...” 

Cut to the next captain’s cocktail party. Once again I was faced 
with the familiar challenge of getting officers to mingle and make 
small talk with the passengers. I made my weekly trek to the 
laconic officers’ throng to drag one or two away and, this time, my 
hand fell on the arm of the ship’s doctor. I hauled him over to the 
nearest group of grinning passengers and introduced him. I then 



84 How to Talk to Anyone 


said, “Just last week Dr. Rossi saved the eyesight of a seaman on 
another ship after a dramatic midnight rescue. Dr. Rossi, I’m sure 
these folks would love to hear about it.” 

It was like a magic wand. To my amazement, it was as though 
Dr. Rossi was blessed instantly with the tongues of angels. His pre¬ 
viously monosyllabic broken English became thickly accented elo¬ 
quence. He recounted the entire story for the growing group of 
passengers gathering around him. I left the throng that Dr. Rossi 
enraptured to pull another officer over to an awaiting audience. 

I grabbed the captain’s stripe-covered arm, dragged him over 
to another pack of smiling passengers and said, “Captain Cafiero, 
why don’t you tell these folks about the dramatic midnight rescue 
you made last week?” The cat released Cafiero’s tongue and he was 
off and running. 

Back to the throng to get the first officer for the next group. 
By now I knew I had a winner. “Signor Salvago, why don’t you tell 
these folks how you awakened the captain at midnight last week 
for the dramatic midnight rescue?” 

By then it was time to go back to extract the ship’s doctor from 
the first bevy and take him to his next pack of passengers. It worked 
even better the second time. He happily commenced his Encore! 
for the second audience. As he chatted away, I raced back to the 
captain to pull him away for a second telling with another throng. 
I felt like the circus juggler who keeps all the plates spinning on 
sticks. Just as I got one conversation spinning, I had to race back 
to the first speaker to give him a whirl at another audience. 

The captain’s cocktail parties were a breeze for me for the rest 
of the season. The three officers loved telling the same story of 
their heroism to new people every cruise. The only problem was 
I noticed the stories getting longer and more elaborate each time. 
I had to adjust my timing in getting them to do a repeat perfor¬ 
mance for the next audience. 



How to Get ’Em Happily Chatting (So Yon Can Slip Away if You Want To!) 8y 


Play It Again, Sam 

“Encore!” is what appreciative audiences chant when they want 
another song from the singer, another dance from the dancer, 
another poem from the poet, and in my case, another storytelling 
from the officers. Encore! is the technique you can use to request 
a repeat story from a prospect, potential employer, or valued 
acquaintance. While the two of you are chatting with a group of 
people, simply turn to him and say, “John, I bet everyone would 
love to hear about the time you caught that thirty-pound striped 
bass.” Or, “Susan, tell everyone that story you just told me of how 
you rescued the kitten from the tree.” He or she will, of course, 
demure. Insist! Your conversation partner is secretly loving it. The 
subtext of your request is “That story of yours was so terrific, I 
want my other friends to hear it.” After all, only crowd pleasers 
are asked to do an Encore! 


A. 


ECHNIQUE #21 

Encore! 


The sweetest sound a performer can hear welling up 
out of the applause is “Encore! Encore! Let’s hear it 
again!” The sweetest sound your conversation partner 
can hear from your lips when you’re talking with a 
group of people is “Tell them about the time you . . .” 

Whenever you’re at a meeting or party with 
someone important to you, think of some stories he or 
she told you. Choose an appropriate one from their 
repertoire that the crowd will enjoy. Then shine the 
spotlight by requesting a repeat performance. 



86 How to Talk to Anyone 


The added benefit of this technique is that, once you’ve got 
them up and running with their conversation, you can sneak off 
and find more interesting company! 

One word of warning: make sure the story you request is one 
in which the teller shines. No one wants to retell the time they lost 
the sale, cracked up the car, or broke up the bar and spent the 
night in jail. Make sure your requested Encore! is a positive story 
where they come out the big winner, not the buffoon. 

The full beauty of this technique will hit you like a happy 
thunderbolt the first time you use it with someone who is telling 
a long and wearisome tale. You simply tiptoe away and let the bore 
spin the story on and on with your friend. (Of course, your friend 
may never speak to you again. But that’s not germaine to this 
chapter!) 

The next technique deals with sharing some positive stories of 
your life. 



22 How to Come Across 
as a Positive Person 


Often people think when they meet someone they like, they 
should share a secret, reveal an intimacy, or make a confession of 
sorts to show they are human too. Airing your youthful battle with 
bed-wetting, teeth grinding, or thumb sucking—or your present 
struggle with gout or a goiter—supposedly endears you to the 
masses. 

Well, sometimes it does. One study showed that if someone 
is above you in stature, their revealing a foible brings them closer 
to you . 12 The holes in the bottom of presidential candidate Adlai 
Stevenson’s shoes charmed a nation, as did George H. W. Bush’s 
shocking admission that he couldn’t stomach broccoli. 

If you’re on sure footing, say a superstar who wants to become 
friends with a fan, go ahead and tell your devotees about the time 
you were out of work and penniless. But if you’re not a superstar, 
better play it safe and keep the skeletons in the closet until later. 
People don’t know you well enough to put your foible in context. 

Later in a relationship, telling your new friend you’ve been 
thrice married, you got caught shoplifting as a teenager, and you 
got turned down for a big job may be no big deal. And that may 
be the extent of what could be construed as black marks on an 
otherwise flawless life of solid relationships, no misdemeanors, and 


*7 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



88 How to Talk to Anyone 


an impressive professional record. But very early in a relationship, 
the instinctive reaction is “What else is coming? If he shares that 
with me so quickly, what else is he hiding? A closetful of ex¬ 
spouses, a criminal record, walls papered with rejection letters?” 
Your new acquaintance has no way of knowing your confession 
was a generous act, a well-intentioned revelation, on your part. 


-V 


ECHNIQUE #22 

Ac-cen-tu-ate the Pos i tive 


When first meeting someone, lock your closet door and 
save your skeletons for later. You and your new good 
friend can invite the skeletons out, have a good laugh, 
and dance over their bones later in the relationship. But 
now’s the time, as the old song says, to “ac-cen-tu-ate 
the pos-i-tive and elim-i-nate the neg-a-tive.” 


So far, in this section, you have found assertive methods for 
meeting people and mastering small talk. The next is both an 
assertive and defensive move to help spare you that pasty smile we 
tend to sport when we have no idea what people are talking about. 



^ How to Always Have 
Something Interesting 
to Say 


You’ve heard folks whine, “I can’t go to the party, I haven’t got a 
thing to wear.” When was the last time you heard, “I can’t go to 
the party, I haven’t got a thing to say?” 

When going to a gathering with great networking possibili¬ 
ties, you naturally plan your outfit and make sure your shoes will 
match. And, of course, you must have just the right tie or correct 
color lipstick. You puff your hair, pack your business cards, and 
you’re off. 

Whoa! Wait a minute. Didn’t you forget the most important 
thing? What about the right conversation to enhance your image? 
Are you actually going to say anything that comes to mind—or 
doesn’t—at the moment? You wouldn’t don the first outfit your 
groping hand hits in the darkened closet, so you shouldn’t leave 
your conversing to the first thought that comes to mind when fac¬ 
ing a group of expectant, smiling faces. You will, of course, fol¬ 
low your instincts in conversation. But at least be prepared in case 
inspiration doesn’t hit. 

The best way to ensure you’re conversationally in the swing of 
things is to listen to a newscast just before you leave. What’s hap¬ 
pening right now in the world—all the fires, floods, air disasters, 
toppled governments, and stock market crashes—pulverizes into 


89 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



go How to Talk to Anyone 


great conversational fodder, no matter what crowd you’re circu¬ 
lating in. 

It is with some embarrassment that I must attribute the fol¬ 
lowing technique to a businesswoman in the world’s oldest pro¬ 
fession. For a magazine article I was writing, I interviewed one of 
the savviest operators in her field, Sidney Biddle Barrows, the 
famed Mayflower Madam. 


2 $ 


ECHNIQUE 


#23 


The Latest News ... Don’t Leave Home 
Without It 


The last move to make before leaving for the party— 
even after you’ve given yourself final approval in the 
mirror—is to turn on the radio news or scan your 
newspaper. Anything that happened today is good 
material. Knowing the big-deal news of the moment is 
also a defensive move that rescues you from putting 
your foot in your mouth by asking what everybody’s 
talking about. Foot-in-mouth is not very tasty in 
public, especially when it’s surrounded by egg-on-face. 


Sidney told me she had a house rule when she was in business. 
All of her female “independent contractors” were directed to keep 
up with the daily news so they could be good conversationalists 
with their clients. This was not just Sidney’s whim. Feedback from 
her employees had revealed that 60 percent of her girls’ work hour 
was spent in chatting and only 40 percent in satisfying the cus¬ 
tomers’ needs. Thus she instructed them to read the daily news¬ 
paper or listen to a radio broadcast before leaving for an 



How to Always Have Something Interesting to Say pi 


appointment. Sidney told me when she initiated this rule, her busi¬ 
ness increased significantly. Reports came back from her clients 
complimenting her on the fascinating women she had working for 
her. The consummate businesswoman, Ms. Barrows always strove 
to exceed her customers’ expectations. 

Ready for the big leagues of conversation? Let’s go. 



This page intentionally left blank. 



PART THREE 

How to Talk 
Like a VIP 


Welcome to the human jungle. When two tigers prowling through 
the jungle chance upon one another in a clearing, they look at each 
other. They freeze. Instinctively they calculate, “If our staring 
came to hissing—came to scratching—came to clawing—who 
would win? Which of us has the stronger survival skills?” 

Tigers in the wilderness differ little from the urban upright 
animals inhabiting the corporate jungle (or singles jungle or social 
jungle). Humans start the process by looking at each other and 
talking. In the business world, while smiling and uttering “How 
do you do?” “Hello,” “Howdy,” or “Hi,” they are, like tigers, 
instinctively, instantaneously, sizing each other up. 

They’re not calculating the length of each other’s claws or the 
sharpness of their teeth. They’re judging each other on a weapon 
far more powerful to survival as they have defined it. Humans are 
judging each other’s communications skills. Although they may 
not know the names of the specific studies first proving it, they 
sense the truth: 85 percent of one’s success in life is directly due 
to communications skills. 13 

They may not be familiar with the U.S. Census Bureau’s 
recent survey showing employers choose candidates with good 
communications skills and attitude way over education, experi- 


93 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



94 How to Talk to Anyone 


ence, and training. 14 But they know communications skills get peo¬ 
ple to the top. Thus, by observing each other carefully during 
casual conversing, it becomes almost immediately evident to both 
which is the bigger cat in the human jungle. 

It doesn’t take long for people to recognize who is an “impor¬ 
tant” person. One cliche, one insensitive remark, one overanxious 
reaction, and you can be professionally or personally demoted. You 
can lose a potentially important friendship or business contact. 
One stupid move and you can tumble off the corporate or social 
ladder. 

The techniques in this section will help ensure that you make 
all the right moves so this doesn’t happen. The following com¬ 
munications skills give you a leg up to start your ascent to the top 
of any ladder you choose. 



m How to Find Out What 
They Do (Without 
Even Asking!) 


To size each other up, the first question little cats flat-pawedly ask 
each other is, “And what do you do? Hmm?” Then they crouch 
there, quivering their whiskers and twitching their noses, with an 
obvious “I’m going to pronounce silent judgment on you after you 
answer” look on their pusses. 

Big cats never ask outright, “What do you do?” (Oh they find 
out, all right, in a much more subtle manner.) By not asking the 
question, the big boys and big girls come across as more princi¬ 
pled, even spiritual. “After all,” their silence says, “a man or woman 
is far more than his or her job.” 

Resisting the tempting question also shows their sensitivity. 
With so much downsizing, rightsizing, and capsizing of corpora¬ 
tions these days, the blunt interrogation evokes uneasiness. The 
job question is not just unpleasant for those who are “between 
engagements.” I have several gainfully employed friends who hate 
being asked, “And what do you do?” (One of these folks cuts 
cadavers for autopsies, the other is an IRS collection agent.) 

Additionally, millions of talented and accomplished women 
have chosen to devote themselves to motherhood. When the cruel 
corporate question is thrust at them, they feel guilty. The rude 
interrogation belittles their commitment to their families. No mat- 


95 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



g 6 How to Talk to Anyone 


ter how the women answer, they fear the asker is only going to 
hear a humble “I’m just a housewife.” 

Big boys and big girls should avoid asking, “What do you do?” 
for another reason: their abstinence from the question leads lis¬ 
teners to believe that they are in the habit of soaring with a high¬ 
flying crowd. Recently I attended a posh party on Easy Street. (I 
suspect they invited me as their token working-class person.) I 
noticed no one was asking anyone what they did—because these 
swells didn’t do anything. Oh, some might have a ticker tape on 
the bed table of their mansion to track investments. But they def¬ 
initely did not work for a living. 

The final benefit to not asking, “What do you do?” is it throws 
people off guard. It convinces them you are enjoying their com¬ 
pany for who they are, not for any crass networking reason. 

Technique #24 

What Do You Do-NOT! 

A sure sign you’re a Somebody is the conspicuous ab¬ 
sence of the question, “What do you do?” (You deter¬ 
mine this, of course, but not with those four dirty 
words that label you as either a ruthless networker, a 
social climber, a gold-digging husband or wife hunter, 
or someone who’s never strolled along Easy Street.) 


The Right Way to Find Out 

So how do you find out what someone does for a living? (I thought 
you’d never ask.) You simply practice the following eight words. 
All together now: “How . . . do . . . you . . . spend . . . most . . . 
of. . . your . . . time?” 



How to Find Out What They Do (Without Even Asking!) 97 


“How do you spend most of your time?” is the gracious way 
to let a cadaver cutter, a tax collector, or a capsized employee off 
the hook. It’s the way to reinforce an accomplished mother’s 
choice. It’s the way to assure a spiritual soul you see his or her inner 
beauty. It’s a way to suggest to a swell that you reside on Easy 
Street, too. 

Now, suppose you’ve just made the acquaintance of someone 
who does like to talk about his or her work? Asking, “How do you 
spend most of your time?” also opens the door for workaholics to 
spout off, “Oh golly,” they mock moan, “I just spend all my time 
working.” That, of course, is your invitation to grill them for 
details. (Then they’ll talk your ear off.) Yet the new wording of 
your question gives those who are somewhere between “at leisure” 
and “work addicted” the choice of telling you about their job or 
not. Finally, asking “How do you spend most of your time?” 
instead of “And what do you do?” gives you your big cat stripes 
right off. 



*s How to Know What to 
Say When They Ask, 
“What Do You Do?” 


Now, 99 percent of the people you meet will, of course, ask “And 
what do you do?” Big winners, realizing someone will always ask, 
are fully prepared for the interrogation. 

Many folks have one written resume for job seeking. They 
type it up and then trudge off to the printer to get a nice neat 
stack to send to all prospective employers. The resume lists their 
previous positions, dates of employment, and education. Then, at 
the bottom, they might as well have scribbled, “Well, that’s me. 
Take it or leave it.” And usually they get left. Why? Because pro¬ 
spective employers do not find enough specific points in the 
resume that relate directly to what their firm is seeking. 

Boys and girls in the big leagues, however, have bits and bytes 
of their entire work experience tucked away in their computers. 
When applying for a job, they punch up only the appropriate data 
and print it out so it looks like it just came from the printer. 

My friend Roberto was out of work last year. He applied for 
two positions: a sales manager of an ice cream company and head 
of strategic planning for a fast-food chain. He did extensive 
research and found the ice cream company had deep sales diffi¬ 
culties and the food chain had long-range international aspirations. 


9 8 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Know What to Say When They Ask, “What Do You Do?” 99 


Did he send the same resume to each? Absolutely not. His resume 
never deviated one iota from the truth of his background. How¬ 
ever, for the ice cream company, he highlighted his experience 
turning a small company around by doubling its sales in three 
years. For the food chain, he underscored his experience working 
in Europe and his knowledge of foreign markets. 

Both firms offered Roberto the job. Now he could play them 
off against each other. He went to each, explaining he’d like to 
work for them but another firm was offering a higher salary or 
more perks. The two firms started bidding against each other for 
Roberto. He finally chose the food chain at almost double the 
salary they originally offered him. 

To make the most of every encounter, personalize your verbal 
resume with just as much care as you would your written cur¬ 
riculum vitae. Instead of having one answer to the omnipresent 
“What do you do?” prepare a dozen or so variations, depending 
on who’s asking. For optimum networking, every time someone 
asks about your job, give a calculated oral resume in a nutshell. 
Before you submit your answer, consider what possible interest the 
asker could have in you and your work. 

“Here’s How My Life Can Benefit Yours” 

Top salespeople talk extensively of the “benefit statement.” They 
know, when talking with a potential client, they should open their 
conversation with a benefit statement. When my colleague Brian 
makes cold calls, instead of saying “Hello, my name is Brian Tracy. 
I’m a sales trainer,” he says, “Hello, my name is Brian Tracy from 
the Institute for Executive Development. Would you be interested 
in a proven method that can increase your sales from 20 to 30 per¬ 
cent over the next twelve months?” That is his benefit statement. 
He highlights the specific benefits of what he has to offer to his 
prospect. 



ioo How to Talk to Anyone 


My hairdresser Gloria, I discovered, gives a terrific benefit 
statement to everyone she meets. That’s probably why she has so 
many clients. In fact, that’s how she got me as a client. When I 
met Gloria at a convention, she told me she was a hairdresser who 
specialized in flexible hairstyles for the businesswoman. She casu¬ 
ally mentioned she has many clients who choose a conservative 
hairstyle for work that they can instantly convert to a feminine 
style for social situations. “Hey, that’s me,” I said to myself, fin¬ 
gering my stringy little ponytail. I asked for her card and Gloria 
became my hairdresser. 

Then, several months later, I happened to see Gloria at 
another event. I overheard her chatting with a stylish grey-haired 
woman at the buffet table. Gloria was saying “... and we specialize 
in a wonderful array of blue rinses.” Now that was news to me! I 
didn’t remember seeing one grey head in her salon. 

As I was leaving the party, Gloria was out on the lawn talking 
animatedly with the host’s teenage daughters. “Oh yeah,” she was 
saying, “like we specialize in these really cool up-to-the-minute 
styles.” Good for you, Gloria! 

Like Gloria the hairdresser, give your response a once-over 
before answering the inevitable “What do you do?” When some¬ 
one asks, never give just a one-word answer. That’s for forms. If 
business networking is on your mind, ask yourself, “How could 
my professional experience benefit this person’s life?” For example, 
here are some descriptions various people might put on their tax 
return: 

Real estate agent 
Financial planner 
Martial arts instructor 
Cosmetic surgeon 
Hairdresser 



How to Know What to Say When They Ask, “What Do You Do?” ioi 


Any practitioner of the above professions should reflect on the 
benefit his or her job has to humankind. (Every job has some ben¬ 
efit or you wouldn’t get paid to do it.) The advice to the folks 
above is 

Don’t say “real estate agent.” Say “I help people moving into 
our area find the right home.” 

Don’t say “financial planner.” Say “I help people plan their 
financial future.” 

Don’t say “martial arts instructor.” Say “I help people defend 
themselves by teaching martial arts.” 

Don’t say “cosmetic surgeon.” Say “I reconstruct people’s faces 
after disfiguring accidents.” (Or, if you’re talking with a 
woman “of a certain age,” as the French so gracefully say, tell 
her, “I help people to look as young as they feel through cos¬ 
metic surgery.”) 

Don’t say “hairdresser.” Say “I help a woman find the right 
hairstyle for her particular face.” (Go, Gloria!) 

Putting the benefit statement in your verbal “Nutshell 
Resume” brings your job to life and makes it memorable. Even if 
your new acquaintance can’t use your services, the next time he or 
she meets someone moving into the area, wanting to plan their 
financial future, thinking of self defense, considering cosmetic sur¬ 
gery, or needing a new hairstyle, who comes to mind? Not the 
unimaginative people who gave the tax-return description of their 
jobs, but the big winners who painted a picture of helping people 
with needs. 


A Nutshell Resume for Your Private Life 

The Nutshell Resume works in nonbusiness situations, too. Since 
the new acquaintances will always ask you about yourself, prepare 



102 How to Talk to Anyone 


a few exciting stock answers. When meeting a potential friend or 
loved one, make your life sound like you will be a fun person to 
know. 

As a young girl, I wrote novels in my mind about my life. 
“Leil, squinting her eyes against the torrential downpour, bravely 
reached out the window into the icy storm to pull the shutters 
tight and keep the family safe from the approaching hurricane.” 
Big deal—Mama asked me to close the windows when it started 
to rain. Still, marching toward the open window, I fancied myself 
the family’s brave savior. 

You don’t need to be quite so melodramatic in your self-image, 
but at least punch up your life to sound interesting and dedicated. 


-V 


ECHNIQUE #25 

The Nutshell Resume 


Just as job-seeking top managers roll a different written 
resume off their printers for each position they’re 
applying for, let a different true story about your 
professional life roll off your tongue for each listener. 
Before responding to “What do you do?” ask yourself, 
“What possible interest could this person have in my 
answer? Could he refer business to me? Buy from me? 
Hire me? Marry my sister? Become my buddy?” 

Wherever you go, pack a nutshell about your own 
life to work into your communications bag of tricks. 



^ How to Sound Even 
Smarter Than You Are 


Did you ever hear someone try to say a word that was just too darn 
big for his tongue? By the smile on the speaker’s face and the gleam 
in his eye as the word limped off his lips, you knew he was really 
proud of it. (To make matters worse, he probably used the word 
incorrectly, inappropriately, and maybe even mispronounced it. 
Ouch.) 

The world perceives people with rich vocabularies to be more 
creative, more intelligent. People with larger vocabularies get hired 
quicker, promoted faster, and listened to a whole lot more. So big 
winners use rich, full words, but they never sound inappropriate. 
The phrases slide gracefully off their tongues to enrich their con¬ 
versation. The words fit. With the care that they choose their tie 
or their blouse, big players in life choose words to match their per¬ 
sonalities and their points. 

The startling good news is that the difference between a 
respected vocabulary and a mundane one is only about fifty words! 
You don’t need much to sound like a big winner. A mere few dozen 
wonderful words will give everyone the impression that you have 
an original and creative mind. 

Acquiring this super vocabulary is easy. You needn’t pore over 
vocabulary books or listen to tapes of pompous pontificators with 

I0 3 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



104 How to Talk to Anyone 


impossible British accents. You don’t need to learn two-dollar 
words that your grandmother, if she heard, would wash out of 
your mouth with soap. 

All you need to do is think of a few tired, overworked words 
you use every day—words like smart, nice, pretty, or good. Then 
grab a thesaurus or book of synonyms off the shelf. Look up that 
common word even you are bored hearing yourself utter every day. 
Examine your long list of alternatives. 

For example, if you turn to the word smart, you’ll find dozens 
of synonyms. Some words are colorful and rich like ingenious, 
resourceful, adroit, shrewd, and many more. Run down the list and 
say each out loud. Which ones fit your personality? Which ones 
seem right for you? Try each on like a suit of clothes to see which 
feel comfortable. Choose a few favorites and practice saying them 
aloud until they become a natural staple of your vocabulary. The 
next time you want to compliment someone on being smart, say, 
you’ll be purring 

“Oh, that was so clever of you.” 

“My how resourceful 
“That was ingenious." 

Or maybe, “How astute of you.” 


And Now, for Men Only 

Gentlemen, we women spend a lot of time in front of the mirror 
(as if you didn’t know). When I was in college, it used to take me 
a full fifteen minutes to fix myself up for a date. Every year since, 
I’ve had to add a few minutes. I’m now up to an hour and a half 
gussying myself up for an evening out. 

Gentlemen, when your wife comes down the staircase all 
dolled up for a night out, or you pick a lady up for dinner, what 
do you say? If you make no comment except, “Well, are you ready 
to go?” how do you think that makes the lady feel? 



How to Sound Even Smarter Than You Are 105 


My friend Gary is a nice gentleman and he occasionally takes 
me to dinner. I met him about twelve years ago, and I’ll never for¬ 
get the first time he arrived on my doorstep for our date. He said, 
“Leil, you look great.” I adored his reaction! 

I saw Gary a month or so later. On my doorstep again, “Leil, 
you look great.” The precise same words as the first time, but I 
still appreciated it. 

It’s been twelve long years now that this gentleman and I have 
been friends. I see him about once every two months, and every 
darn time it’s the same old comment, “Leil, you look great.” (I 
think I’ll show up one evening in a flannel nightshirt and a mud 
pack on my face. I swear Gary will say, “Leil, you look great.”) 

During my seminars, to help men avoid Gary’s mistake, I ask 
every male to think of a synonym for pretty or great. Then I bring 
up one woman and several men. I ask each to pretend he is her 
husband. She has just come down the stairs ready to go out to din¬ 
ner. I ask each to take her hand and deliver his compliment. 

“Darla,” one says, “you look elegant.” 

“Ooh!” Every woman in the room sighs. 

“Darla,” says another, taking her hand, “you look stunning.” 

“Ooh!” Every woman in the room swoons. 

“Darla,” says the third, putting her hand between his, “you 
look ravishing.” 

“Ooooh!” By now every woman in the room has gone limp. 

Pay attention men! Words work on us women. 


More Unisex Suggestions 

Suppose you’ve been at a party and it was wonderful. Don’t tell 
the hosts it was wonderful. Everybody says that. Tell them it was 
a splendid party, a superb party, an extraordinary party. Hug the 
hosts and tell them you had a magnificent time, a remarkable time, 
a glorious time. 



io 6 How to Talk to Anyone 


The first few times you say a word like glorious, it may not roll 
comfortably off your tongue. Yet you have no trouble with the 
word wonderful. Hmm, glor-i-ous doesn’t have any more syllables 
than won-der-ful. Neither does it have any more difficult sounds 
to pronounce. Vocabulary is all a matter of familiarity. Use your 
new favorite words a few times and, just like breaking in a new 
pair of shoes, you’ll be very comfortable wearing your glorious new 
words. 


Zb 


ECHNIQUE 


#2 6 


Your Personal Thesaurus 


Look up some common words you use every day in the 
thesaurus. Then, like slipping your feet into a new pair 
of shoes, slip your tongue into a few new words to see 
how they fit. If you like them, start making permanent 
replacements. 

Remember, only fifty words makes the difference 
between a rich, creative vocabulary and an average, 
middle-of-the-road one. Substitute a word a day for 
two months and you’ll be in the verbally elite. 



2 7 How to Not Sound 
Anxious (Let Them 
Discover Your Similarity) 


Tigers prowl with tigers; lions lurk with lions; and little alley cats 
scramble around with other little alley cats. Similarity breeds 
attraction. But in the human jungle, big cats know a secret. When 
you delay revealing your similarity, or let them discover it, it has 
much more punch. Above all, you don’t want to sound anxious to 
have rapport. 

Whenever someone mentions a common interest or experi¬ 
ence, instead of jumping in with a breathless, “Hey, me, too! I do 
that, too” or “I know all about that,” let your conversation part¬ 
ner enjoy talking about it. Let her go on about the country club 
before you tell her you’re a member, too. Let him go on analyzing 
the golf swing of Arnold Palmer before you start casually com¬ 
paring the swings of golf greats Greg, Jack, Tiger, and Arnie. Let 
her tell you how many tennis games she’s won before you just hap¬ 
pen to mention your USTA ranking. 

Several years ago, I was telling a new acquaintance how much 
I love to ski. He listened with interest as I indulged in a detailed 
travelogue of places I’d skied. I raved about the various resorts. I 
analyzed the various conditions. I discussed artificial versus natu¬ 
ral snow. It wasn’t until near the end of my monologue that I 


10 7 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



io 8 How to Talk to Anyone 


finally had the sense to ask my new acquaintance if he skied. He 
replied, “Yes, I keep a little apartment in Aspen.” 

Cool! If he’d jumped in and told me about his ski pad right 
after I first told him how much I liked skiing, I’d have been 
impressed. Mildly. However, waiting until the end of our conver¬ 
sation—and then revealing he was such an avid skier that he kept 
an Aspen ski pad—made it unforgettable. 

Here’s the technique I call “Kill the Quick ‘Me, Too!’ ” When¬ 
ever people mention an activity or interest you share, let them 
enjoy discussing their passion. Then, when the time is right, casu¬ 
ally mention you share their interest. 


Oh, I Must Have Been Boring You 

I waited weeks for the opportunity to try it out. Finally the 
moment presented itself at a convention. A new contact began 
telling me about her recent trip to Washington, D.C. (She had no 
idea that Washington was where I grew up.) She told me all about 
the Capitol, the Washington Monument, the Kennedy Center, and 
how she and her husband went bicycling in Rock Creek Park. 
(Momentarily I forgot I was keeping my mouth shut to practice 
my new technique. I was genuinely enjoying hearing about these 
familiar sights from a visitor’s perspective.) 

I asked her where she stayed, where she dined, and if she had 
a chance to get into any of the beautiful Maryland or Virginia sub¬ 
urbs. At one point, obviously pleased by my interest in her trip, 
she said, “You sound like you know a lot about Washington.” 

“Yes,” I replied. “It’s my hometown, but I haven’t been back 
there in ages.” 

“Your hometown!” she squealed. “My goodness, why didn’t 
you tell me? I must have been boring you.” 

“Oh, not at all,” I replied honestly. “I was enjoying hearing 
about your trip so much, I was afraid you’d stop if I told you.” Her 



How to Not Sound Anxious (Let Them Discover Your Similarity) iop 


big smile and barely audible “Oh gosh” let me know I had won a 
new friend. 

When someone starts telling you about an activity he has 
done, a trip she has made, a club he belongs to, an interest she 
has—anything that you share—bite your tongue. Let the teller 
relish his or her own monologue. Relax and enjoy it, too, secretly 
knowing how much pleasure your conversation partner will have 
when you reveal you share the same experience. Then, when the 
moment is ripe, casually disclose your similarity. And be sure to 
mention how much you enjoyed hearing about his or her shared 
interest. 




ECHNIQUE #27 

Kill the Quick “Me, Too!” 


Whenever you have something in common with 
someone, the longer you wait to reveal it, the more 
moved (and impressed) he or she will be. You emerge as 
a confident big cat, not a lonely little stray, hungry for 
quick connection with a stranger. 

P.S.: Don’t wait too long to reveal your shared 
interest or it will seem like you’re being tricky. 



28 How to Be a Jou- 
Firstie” to Gain Their 
Respect and Affection 


“SEX! Now that I have your attention. ...” Two-bit comics have 
been using that gag from the days when two bits bought a 
foursquare meal. However, big winners know there’s a three-letter 
word more potent then SEX to get people’s attention. That word 
is YOU. 

Why is you such a powerful word? Because when we were 
infants, we thought we were the center of the universe. Nothing 
mattered but ME, MYSELF, and I. The rest of the shadowy forms 
stirring about us (which we later learned were other people) existed 
solely for what they could do for us. Self-centered little tykes that 
we were, our tiny brains translated every action, every word, into, 
“How does that affect ME?” 

Big winners know we haven’t changed a bit. Adults camouflage 
their self-centeredness under a mask of civilization and politeness. 
Yet the human brain still immediately, instinctively, and unfailingly 
translates everything into terms of “How does that affect ME?” 

For example, suppose, gentlemen, you want to ask a colleague, 
Jill, if she would like to join you for dinner. So you say to her, 
“There’s a really good new Indian restaurant in town. Will you 
join me there for dinner tonight?” 


no 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Be a “You -Firstie” to Gain Their Respect and Affection 


hi 


Before answering, Jill is thinking to herself, “By ‘good’ does 
he mean the food or the atmosphere or both?” Her reverie con¬ 
tinues, “Indian cuisine, I’m not sure. He says it’s good. However, 
will I like it?” While thinking, Jill hesitates. You probably take her 
hesitation personally, and the joy of the exchange diminishes. 

Suppose, instead, you had said to her, “Jill, you will really love 
this new Indian restaurant. Will you join me there this evening 
for dinner?” Phrasing it that way, you’ve already subliminally 
answered Jill’s questions and she’s more apt to give you a quick 
“yes.” 

The pleasure-pain principle is a guiding force in life. Psy¬ 
chologists tell us everyone automatically gravitates toward that 
which is pleasurable and pulls away from that which is painful. 
For many people, thinking is painful. 

So big winners (when they wish to control, inspire, be loved by, 
sell to people, or get them to go to dinner) do the thinking for them. 
They translate everything into the other person’s terms by starting 
as many sentences as they can with that powerful little three-letter 
word, you. Thus, I call the technique “Comm-YOU-nication.” 


Comm-YOU-nicate When You 
Want a Favor 

Putting you first gets a much better response, especially when 
you’re asking a favor, because it pushes the asker’s pride button. 
Suppose you want to take a long weekend. You decide to ask your 
boss if you can take Friday off. Which request do you think he or 
she is going to react to more positively? “Can / take Friday off, 
Boss?” Or this one: “Boss, can you do without me Friday?” 

In the first case, Boss had to translate your “Can I take Friday 
off?” into “Can I do without this employee Friday?” That’s an extra 
thought process. (And you know how some bosses hate to think!) 



in How to Talk to Anyone 


However, in the second case, “Boss, can you do without me 
Friday,” you did Boss’s thinking for her. Your new wording made 
managing without you a matter of pride for Boss. “Of course,” she 
said to herself. “I can manage without your help Friday.” 


Comm-YOU-nicate Your Compliments 

Comm-YOU-nication also enriches your social conversation. Gen¬ 
tlemen, say a lady likes your suit. Which woman gives you warmer 
feelings? The woman who says, “I like your suit.” Or the one who 
says, “You look great in that suit.” 

Big players who make business presentations use Comm- 
YOU-nication to excellent advantage. Suppose you’re giving a talk 
and a participant asks a question. He likes to hear you say, “That’s 
a good question.” However, consider how much better he feels 
when you tell him, “ You’ve asked a good question.” 

Salespeople, don’t just tell your prospects, “It’s important that 
. . . . ” Convince them by informing them, “ You’ll see the impor¬ 
tance of. . . . ” 

When negotiating, instead of, “The result will be ... ” let 
them know, “You’ll see the result when you. . . .” 

Starting sentences with you even works when talking to 
strangers on the street. Once, driving around San Francisco hope¬ 
lessly lost, I asked people walking along the sidewalk how to get 
to the Golden Gate Bridge. I stopped a couple trudging up a hill. 
“Excuse me,” I called out the window, “I can’t find the Golden 
Gate Bridge.” The pair looked at each other and shrugged with 
that “How stupid can these tourists get” look on their faces. “That 
direction,” the husband mumbled, pointing straight ahead. 

Still lost, I called out to the next couple I encountered. 
“Excuse me, where’s the Golden Gate Bridge?” Without smiling, 
they pointed in the opposite direction. 



How to Be a “You -Firstie” to Gain Their Respect and Affection 113 


Then I decided to try Comm-YOU-nication. When I came 
upon the next strolling couple, I called out the window, “Excuse 
me, could you tell me where the Golden Gate Bridge is?” 

“Of course,” they said, answering my question literally. You 
see, by phrasing the question that way, it was a subtle challenge. I 
was asking, in essence, “Are you able to give me directions?” This 
hits them in the pride button. They walked over to my car and 
gave me explicit instructions. 

“Hey,” I thought. “This you stuff really works.” To test my 
hypothesis, I tried it a few more times. I kept asking passersby my 
three forms of the question. Sure enough, whenever I asked, 
“Could you tell me where .. .” people were more pleasant and help¬ 
ful than when I started the question with / or where. 




ECHNIQUE #28 

Comm-YOU-nication 


Start every appropriate sentence with you. It immedi¬ 
ately grabs your listener’s attention. It gets a more 
positive response because it pushes the pride button 
and saves them having to translate it into “me” terms. 

When you sprinkle you as liberally as salt and 
pepper throughout your conversation, your listeners 
find it an irresistible spice. 


I’m sure when they recover the flight box from the Fall of Man 
under a fig leaf in the Garden of Eden, it will convince the world 
of the power of the word you. Eve did not ask Adam to eat the 
apple. She did not command him to eat the apple. She didn’t even 



ii4 How to Talk to Anyone 


say, “Adam, I want you to eat this apple.” She phrased it (as all big 
winners would), “You will love this apple.” That’s why he bit. 


Comm-YOU-nication Is a Sign of Sanity 

Therapists calculate inmates of mental institutions say / and me 
twelve times more often than residents of the outside world. As 
patients’ conditions improve, the number of times they use the 
personal pronouns also diminishes. 

Continuing up the sanity scale, the fewer times you use /, the 
more sane you seem to your listeners. If you eavesdrop on big win¬ 
ners talking with each other, you’ll notice a lot mor e you than / in 
their conversation. 

The next technique concerns a way big winners are silently 
yo«-oriented. 



29 How to Make Them Feel 
You “Don’t Smile at 
Just Anybody” 


Have you ever seen those low-budget, mail-order fashion cata¬ 
logues that use the same model throughout? Whether she is 
engulfed in a wedding gown or partially clad in a bikini, her face 
sports the same plastic smile. Looking at her, you get the feeling 
if you rapped on her forehead, a tiny voice would come back say¬ 
ing “Nobody’s in here.” 

Whereas models in more sophisticated magazines have mas¬ 
tered a myriad of different expressions: a flirtatious “I’ve got a 
secret” smile on one page; a quizzical “I think I’d like to get to 
know you but I’m not sure” smile on the next; and a mysterious 
Mona Lisa smile on the third. You feel there’s a brain running the 
operation somewhere inside that beautiful head. 

I once stood in the receiving line of the ship I worked on, 
along with the captain, his wife, and several other officers. One 
passenger with a radiant smile started shaking hands down our 
line. When he got to me, he flashed a shimmering smile, reveal¬ 
ing teeth as even and white as keys on a new piano. I was trans¬ 
fixed. It was as though a brilliant light had illuminated the dim 
ballroom. I wished him a happy cruise and resolved to find this 
charming gentleman later. 


ns 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



ii6 How to Talk to Anyone 


Then he was introduced to the next person. Out of the cor¬ 
ner of my eye, I saw his identical glistening grin. A third person, 
the same grin. My interest began to dwindle. 

When he gave his fourth indistinguishable smile to the next 
person, he started to resemble a Cheshire cat. By the time he was 
introduced to the fifth person, his consistent smile felt like a strobe 
light disturbing the ambience of the ballroom. Strobe Man went 
on flashing everybody the same smile down the line. I had no fur¬ 
ther interest in talking with him. 

Why did this man’s stock shoot high in my ticker one minute 
and plummet the next? Because his smile, although charming, 
reflected no special reaction to me. Obviously, he gave the same 
smile to everybody and, by that, it lost all its specialness. If Strobe 
Man had given each of us a slightly different smile, he would have 
appeared sensitive and insightful. (Of course, if his smile had been 
just a tad bigger for me than for the others, I couldn’t have waited 
for the formalities to be over to seek him out in the crowded 
ballroom.) 


Review Your Repertoire of Smiles 

If your job required you to carry a gun, you would, of course, learn 
all about the moving parts before firing it. And before taking aim, 
you would carefully consider whether it would murder, maim, or 
merely wound your target. Since your smile is one of your biggest 
communications weapons, learn all about the moving parts and the 
effect on your target. Set aside five minutes. Lock your bedroom or 
bathroom door so your family doesn’t think you’ve gone off the 
deep end. Now stand in front of the mirror and flash a few smiles. 
Discover the subtle differences in your repertoire. 

Just as you would alternate saying “Hello,” “How do you do,” 
and “I am pleased to meet you” when being introduced to a group 



How to Make Them Feel You “Don’t Smile at Just Anybody” 117 


of people, vary your smile. Don’t use the same on each. Let each 
of your smiles reflect the nuances of your sentiment about the 
recipient. 


Zh 


ECHNIQUE #29 

The Exclusive Smile 


If you flash everybody the same smile, like a Confed¬ 
erate dollar, it loses value. When meeting groups of 
people, grace each with a distinct smile. Let your smiles 
grow out of the beauty big players find in each new 
face. 

If one person in a group is more important to you 
than the others, reserve an especially big, flooding smile 
just for him or her. 


In Defense of the Quickie 

There are times, I discovered, when the quick put-on smile works. 
For example, when you want to engineer the acquaintance of 
someone to whom you have not had the opportunity to be intro¬ 
duced. (In the vernacular, that’s “pick them up.”) 

The smile’s pickup power was proven for posterity by solemn 
researchers at the University of Missouri. They conducted a highly 
controlled study titled “Giving Men the Come-On: Effect of Eye 
Contact and Smiling in a Bar Environment .” 15 (I kid you not.) To 
prove their hypothesis, female researchers made eye contact with 
unsuspecting male subjects enjoying a little libation in a local 
drinking establishment. Sometimes, the female researchers fol¬ 
lowed their glance with a smile. In other cases, no smile. 



ii8 How to Talk to Anyone 


The results? I quote the study: “The highest approach behav¬ 
ior, 60 percent, was observed in the condition in which there was 
smiling.” That translates into layman’s English: “The guy came 
over 60 percent of the time when the lady smiled.” Without the 
smile, he “made the approach only 20 percent of the time.” So, 
yes, a smile works for those who wish to pick somebody up. 

However, in situations where the stakes are higher, try The 
Flooding Smile from the first section and now The Exclusive 
Smile. 




How to Avoid Sounding 
Like a Jerk 


Do you remember that scene from the movie classic Annie Hall 
where Diane Keaton is first meeting Woody Allen? As she’s chat¬ 
ting with him, we hear her private thoughts. She’s musing to her¬ 
self, “Oh I hope he’s not a jerk like all the others.” 

One of the quickest ways to make a big winner think you are, 
well, a jerk, is to use a cliche. If you’re chatting with a top com¬ 
municator and even innocently remark “Yes, I was tired as a dog,” 
or “She was cute as a button,” you’ve unknowingly laid a linguis¬ 
tic bomb. 

Big winners silently moan when they hear someone mouth a 
trite overworn phrase. Oh sure, just like the rest of us, big win¬ 
ners find themselves feeling fit as a fiddle, happy as a lark, or high 
as a kite. Like the rest of humanity, they consider some of their 
acquaintances crazy as a loon, nutty as a fruitcake, or blind as a 
bat. Because many of them work hard, many of them are as busy 
as a bee and get rich as Croesus. 

Yet would any of them describe themselves in those words? 
Not in a coon’s age! Why? Because when a big winner hears your 
cliche, you might as well be saying, “My powers of imagination 
are impoverished. I can’t think of anything original to say, so I 
must fall back on these trite overworn phrases.” Mouthing a com- 

119 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



no How to Talk to Anyone 


mon cliche around uncommonly successful people brands you as 
uncommonly common. 


4 * 


ECHNIQUE #30 

Don’t Touch a Cliche with a Ten-Foot Pole 


Be on guard. Don’t use any cliches when chatting with 
big winners. Don’t even touch one with a ten-foot pole. 
Never? Not even when hell freezes over? Not unless you 
want to sound dumb as a doorknob. 

Instead of coughing up a cliche, roll your own 
clever phrases by using the next technique. 



3^ How to Use 
Motivational Speakers’ 
Techniques to Enhance 
Your Conversation 


They say the pen is mightier than the sword. It is, but the tongue 
is even mightier than the pen. Our tongues can bring crowds to 
laughter, to tears, and often to their feet in shouting appreciation. 
Orators have moved nations to war or brought lost souls to God. 
And what is their equipment? The same eyes, ears, hands, legs, 
arms, and vocal chords you and I have. 

Perhaps a professional athlete has a stronger body or a profes¬ 
sional singer is blessed with a more beautiful singing voice than 
the one we were doled out. But the professional speaker starts out 
with the same equipment we all have. The difference is, these jaw- 
smiths use it all. They use their hands, they use their bodies, and 
they use specific gestures with heavy impact. They think about the 
space they’re talking in. They employ many different tones of 
voice, they invoke various expressions, they vary the speed with 
which they speak . . . and they make effective use of silence. 

You may not have to make a formal speech anytime soon, but 
chances are sometime (probably very soon) you’re going to want 


121 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



122 How to Talk to Anyone 


people to see things your way. Whether it’s persuading your fam¬ 
ily to spend their next vacation at Grandmas, or convincing the 
stockholders in your multimillion-dollar corporation that it’s time 
to do a takeover, do it like a pro. Get a book or two on public 
speaking and learn some of the tricks of the trade. Then put some 
of that drama into your everyday conversation. 


A Gem for Every Occasion 

If stirring words help make your point, ponder the impact of pow¬ 
erful phrases. They’ve helped politicians get elected (“Read my 
lips: no new taxes.”) and defendants get acquitted (“If it doesn’t 
fit, you must acquit.”). 

If George H. W. Bush had said, “I promise not to raise taxes,” 
or Johnny Cochran, during O. J. Simpson’s criminal trial, had said, 
“If the glove doesn’t fit, he must be innocent,” their bulky sen¬ 
tences would have slipped in and out of the voter’s or juror’s con¬ 
sciousness. As every politician and trial lawyer knows, neat phrases 
make powerful weapons. (If you’re not careful, your enemies will 
later use them against you—read my lips!) 

One of my favorite speakers is a radio broadcaster named 
Barry Farber who brightens up late-night radio with sparkling sim¬ 
iles. Barry would never use a cliche like “nervous as a cat on a hot 
tin roof.” He’d describe being nervous about losing his job as “I 
felt like an elephant dangling over a cliff with his tail tied to a 
daisy.” Instead of saying he looked at a pretty woman, he’d say, 
“My eyeballs popped out and dangled by the optic nerve.” 

When I first met him, I asked, “Mr. Farber, how do you come 
up with these phrases?” 

“My daddy’s Mr. Farber. I’m Barry,” he chided (his way of say¬ 
ing, “Call me Barry”). He then candidly admitted, although some 
of his phrases are original, many are borrowed. (Elvis Presley used 



Hoiv to Use Motivational Speakers’ Techniques to Enhance Your Conversation 123 


to say, “My daddy’s Mr. Presley. Call me Elvis.”) Like all profes¬ 
sional speakers, Barry spends several hours a week gleaning 
through books of quotations and humor. All professional speakers 
do. They collect bon mots they can use in a variety of situations— 
most especially to scrape egg off their faces when something unex¬ 
pected happens. 

Many speakers use authors and speaker’s agent Lilly Walters’s 
face-saver lines from her book, What to Say When You’re Dying on 
the Platform. 16 If you tell a joke and no one laughs, try “That joke 
was designed to get a silent laugh—and it worked.” If the micro¬ 
phone lets out an agonizing howl, look at it and say, “I don’t under¬ 
stand. I brushed my teeth this morning.” If someone asks you a 
question you don’t want to answer, “Could you save that question 
until I’m finished—and well on my way home?” All pros think of 
holes they might fall into and then memorize great escape lines. 
You can do the same. 

Look through books of similes to enrich your day-to-day con¬ 
versations. Instead of “happy as a lark” try “happy as a lottery win¬ 
ner” or “happy as a baby with its first ice cream cone.” Instead of 
“bald as an eagle,” try “bald as a new marine” or “bald as a bull¬ 
frog’s belly.” Instead of “quiet as a mouse,” try “quiet as an eel 
swimming in oil” or “quiet as a fly lighting on a feather duster.” 

find phrases that have visual impact. Instead of a cliche like 
“sure as death and taxes,” try “as certain as beach traffic in July” 
or “as sure as your shadow will follow you.” Your listeners can’t see 
death or taxes. But they sure can see beach traffic in July or their 
shadow following them down the street. 

Try to make your similes relate to the situation. If you’re rid¬ 
ing in a taxi with someone, “as sure as that taxi meter will rise” has 
immediate impact. If you’re talking with a man walking his dog, 
“as sure as your dog is thinking about that tree” adds a touch of 
humor. 



124 How to Talk to Anyone 


Make ’Em Laugh, Make ’Em Laugh, 

Make ’Em Laugh 

Humor enriches any conversation. But not jokes starting with, 
“Hey didja hear the one about. . . ?” Plan your humor and make 
it relevant. For example, if you’re going to a meeting on the bud¬ 
get, look up money in a quotation book. In an uptight business 
situation, a little levity shows you’re at ease. 

Once, during an oppressive financial meeting, I heard a top 
executive say, “Don’t worry, this company has enough money to 
stay in business for years—unless we pay our creditors.” He broke 
the tension and won the appreciation of all. Later I saw a similar 
quote in a humor book attributed to Jackie Mason, the comedian. 
So what? The exec still came across as a cool communicator with 
his clever comment. 

Big players who want to be quoted in the media lie awake at 
night gnawing the pillow trying to come up with phrases the press 
will pick up. A Michigan veterinarian named Timothy, a he
avy 
hitter in his own field but completely unknown outside it, made 
national headlines when he planned to attach a pair of feet to a 
rooster who lost his to frostbite. Why? Because he called it a 
“drumstick transplant.” 

I don’t know if a French woman, Jeanne Calment, then offi¬ 
cially the world’s oldest person, was looking for publicity on her 
122nd birthday. But she made international headlines when she told 
the media, “I’ve only ever had one wrinkle, and I’m sitting on it.” 

Mark Victor Hansen, a big player in his own field but once rel¬ 
atively unknown outside of it, was propelled into national promi¬ 
nence when he came up with a catchy name for his book 
coauthored with Jack Canfield, Chicken Soup for the Soul. He told 
me his original title was 101 Pretty Stories. How far would that have 
gone? Soon the world was lapping up, among others, his Chicken 



Hoiv to Use Motivational Speakers’ Techniques to Enhance Your Conversation 125 


Soup for the Womans Soul, Chicken Soup for the Teenage Soul, 
Chicken Soup for the Mother’s Soul, Chicken Soup for the Christian 
Soul, plus second, third, and fourth servings of chicken soup in 
hardcover, paperback, audiocassette, videocassette, and calendars. 


A Word of Warning 

No matter how good your material is, it bombs if it doesn’t fit the 
situation. I learned this the hard way during my cruise ship days. 
On a cruise to England I decided to give my passengers a reading 
of the English love poems of Elizabeth Barrett and Robert Brown¬ 
ing. You know, “How do I love thee? Let me count the ways.” It 
was a BIG hit. The passengers loved it and raved for days. I 
couldn’t walk out on deck without some passenger turning to me 
and affectionately echoing, “How do I love thee?” 


-V, 


ECHNIQUE #31 

Use Jawsmith’s Jive 


Whether you’re standing behind a podium facing 
thousands or behind the barbecue grill facing your 
family, you’ll move, amuse, and motivate with the 
same skills. 

Read speakers’ books to cull quotations, pull pearls 
of wisdom, and get gems to tickle their funny bones. 
Find a few bon mots to let casually slide off your 
tongue on chosen occasions. If you want to be notable, 
dream up a crazy quotable. 

Make ’em rhyme, make ’em clever, or make ’em 
funny. Above all, make ’em relevant. 



n6 How to Talk to Anyone 


Naturally I got a pretty swollen head over this performance 
and fancied myself an eminent poetry reader. I decided to reward 
the passengers on the next cruise (which was a cruise to the 
Caribbean and didn’t go anywhere in the neighborhood of 
England) with my spectacular reading of the English love poems. 
WHAT A BOMB! Passengers avoided me on the deck for the rest 
of the cruise. “How did you bore me? Let me count the ways.” 



&amp; How to Banter Like the 
Big Shots Do (Big 
Winners Tell It Like It Is) 


If you stepped into an elevator full of people speaking Hungar¬ 
ian, you might not recognize they were Hungarian unless you 
spoke their language. However, the minute you opened your 
mouth, they’d recognize you’re not Hungarian. 

It’s the same with the big cats. If you overhear several of them 
speaking, you might not recognize they’re big cats. However, the 
minute you opened your mouth they’d recognize you’re not a big 
cat, unless you spoke their lingo. 

What are some differences between a big cat’s growl and a lit¬ 
tle cat’s insignificant hiss? One of the most blatant is euphemisms. 
Big cats aren’t afraid of real words. They call a spade a spade. 
Words like toilet paper don’t scare them. Little cats hide behind 
bathroom tissue. If somebody is rich, big cats call it “rich.” Little 
cats, oh so embarrassed at the concept of talking about money in 
polite company, substitute the word wealthy. When little cats use 
a substitute word or euphemism, they might as well be saying, 
“Whoops, you are better than I am. I’m in polite company now 
and so I’ll use the nicey-nice word.” 

Big cats are anatomically correct—no cutesy words for body 
parts. They’ll say “breasts” when they mean breasts. When they 


I2J 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



128 How to Talk to Anyone 


say “knockers,” they mean decorative structures that hang on the 
front door. And “family jewels” are in the safe on the wall. 

If a big cat is ever in doubt about a word, he or she simply 
resorts to French. If they feel the word buttocks is debatable, der- 
riere will do quite nicely, thank you. 


4 * 


ECHNIQUE #32 

Call a Spade a Spade 


Don’t hide behind euphemisms. Call a spade a spade. 
That doesn’t mean big cats use tasteless four-letter 
words when perfectly decent five- and six-letter ones 
exist. They’ve simply learned the King’s English, and 
they speak it. 

Here’s another way to tell the big players from the 
little ones just by listening to a few minutes of their 
conversation. 



55 How to Avoid the 
World’s Worst 
Conversational Habit 

Once I was at a small dinner party given by the president of an 
advertising agency, Louis, and his wife, Lillian. The evening 
started with cocktails, followed by a gourmet meal accompanied 
by a selection of excellent wines. The conversation had been con¬ 
vivial, the cuisine delicious, and the wine very fine. And very plen¬ 
tiful. At the end of the evening, Louis raised his glass to make a 
toast. A few wine droplets sloshed out of his glass onto the 
tablecloth. 

A pretty young woman who was the date of a new art direc¬ 
tor named Bob giggled and said, “I can tell you’re feeling no pain.” 

Shock waves went around the table. Everyone froze. The host 
was indeed a bit inebriated. However, alluding to Louis being a 
little looped, even in jest, was as though the woman had suddenly 
smashed the crystal chandelier above the table with her dinner 
plate. 

One guest quickly covered the girl’s horrifying gaffe by lift¬ 
ing her glass and saying “None of us is. No one in the company 
of Louis and Lillian could ever feel any pain. Here’s to a truly won¬ 
derful evening.” 

Louis then continued with his toast to the wonderful com¬ 
pany, and no one was feeling pain any longer. Except Bob. He 


I2p 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



ijo How to Talk to Anyone 


knew his date’s innocent teasing was a black mark, if not in his 
personnel file, on his personal file. 

The next sure sign of a little cathood is teasing. Little cats go 
around patting their friends’ paunches and saying, “Enjoying that 
cheesecake, huh?” Or looking at their balding heads and saying, 
“Hey, hair today, gone tomorrow, huh?” They think it’s hilarious 
to make a quip at someone else’s expense and say “You don’t have 
an inferiority complex. You are inferior! Hardy har har.” 


Zb 


ECHNIQUE #33 

Trash the Teasing 


A dead giveaway of a little cat is his or her proclivity to 
tease. An innocent joke at someone else’s expense may 
get you a cheap laugh. Nevertheless, the big cats will 
have the last one. Because you’ll bang your head against 
the glass ceiling they construct to keep little cats from 
stepping on their paws. 

Never, ever, make a joke at anyone else’s expense. 
You’ll wind up paying for it, dearly. 



34 How to Give Them the 
Bad News (and Have 
Them Like You AH 
the More) 


In ancient Egypt, the pharaoh treated the humblest message run¬ 
ner like a prince when he arrived at the palace, if he brought good 
news. However, if the exhausted runner had the misfortune to 
bring the pharaoh unhappy news, his head was chopped off. 

Shades of that spirit pervade today’s conversations. Once a 
friend and I packed up some peanut butter and jelly sandwiches 
for an outing. As we waltzed happily out the door, picnic basket 
in hand, a smiling neighbor, rocking away on his porch, looked 
up at the sky and said, “Oh boy, bad day for a picnic. The news¬ 
cast says it’s going to rain.” I wanted to rub his face in my peanut 
butter and jelly sandwich. Not for his gloomy weather report, for 
his smile. 

Several months ago I was racing to catch a bus. As I breath¬ 
lessly shoved my handful of cash across the Greyhound counter, 
the grinning sales agent gushed, “Oh that bus left five minutes 
ago.” Dreams of decapitation! 

It’s not the news that makes someone angry. It’s the unsym¬ 
pathetic attitude with which it’s delivered. Everyone must give bad 


131 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



i^2 How to Talk to Anyone 


news from time to time, and winning professionals do it with the 
proper attitude. A doctor advising a patient she needs an opera¬ 
tion does it with compassion. A boss informing an employee he 
didn’t get the job takes on a sympathetic demeanor. Grief coun¬ 
selors at airports after fatal crashes share the grief-stricken senti¬ 
ment of relatives. Big winners know, when delivering any bad 
news, they should share the sentiment of the receiver. 

Unfortunately, many people are not aware of this sensitivity. 
When you’re weary from a long flight, has a hotel clerk cheerfully 
chirped that your room isn’t ready yet? When you had your heart 
set on the roast beef, has your waiter merrily warbled that he just 
served the last piece? When you needed cash for the weekend, has 
your bank teller gleefully told you your account is overdrawn? It 
makes you as traveler, diner, or depositor want to put your fist 
right through their insensitive grins. 




ECHNIQUE #34 

It’s the Receiver’s Ball 


A football player wouldn’t last two beats of the time 
clock if he made blind passes. A pro throws the ball 
with the receiver always in mind. 

Before throwing out any news, keep your receiver in 
mind. Then deliver it with a smile, a sigh, or a sob. Not 
according to how you feel about the news, but how the 
receiver will take it. 


Had my neighbor told me of the impending rainstorm with 
sympathy, I would have appreciated his warning. Had the Grey¬ 
hound salesclerk sympathetically informed me that my bus had 
already left, I probably would have said, “Oh, that’s all right. 



How to Give Them the Bad News (and Have Them Like You All the More) 133 


I’ll catch the next one.” Big winners, when they bear bad news, 
deliver bombs with the emotion the bombarded person is sure to 
have. 

Big winners know how to give bad news to people. They also 
know how not to give any news to anyone, even when people are 
pressuring them. Let’s explore that next. 



35 How to Respond When 
You Don’t Want to 
Answer (and Wish They’d 
Shut the Heck Up) 


One of my clients Barbara, a ministar in the furniture business, 
recently separated from her husband and business partner, Frank, 
a megastar in the furniture business. They suffered a long and 
messy divorce that resulted in them keeping the business jointly 
but not having to deal with each other. 

Soon after the divorce, I was at an industry convention with 
Barbara. Since she and Frank were both beloved in the industry, 
people were curious about what had happened and how it affected 
their company. But, of course, no one dared ask outright. And Bar¬ 
bara was offering no explanations. 

I was seated next to Barbara at the gala farewell dinner. Appar¬ 
ently one of her colleagues at the table couldn’t contain her curios¬ 
ity any longer. During dessert, she leaned over to Barbara and in 
a hushed voice asked, “Barbara, what happened with you and 
Frank?” 

Barbara, unruffled by the rude question, simply took a spoon¬ 
ful of her cherries jubilee and said, “We’ve separated, but the com¬ 
pany is unaffected.” 


134 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



Hoiv to Respond When You Don’t Want to Answer 135 


Not satisfied with that answer, the woman pumped harder. 
“Are you still working together?” 

Barbara took another bite of her dessert and repeated in pre¬ 
cisely the same tone of voice, “We’ve separated, but the company 
is unaffected.” 

The frustrated interrogator was not going to give up easily. 
“Are you both still working in the company?” 

Barbara, appearing not the least disturbed by the woman’s 
incontinent insistence, scooped the last cherry out of her dish, 
smiled, looked directly at her, and said in the identical tone of 
voice, “We’ve separated, but the company is unaffected.” 

That shut her up. Barbara had shown her big winner’s badge 
by using “The Broken Record” technique, the most effective way 
to curtail an unwelcome cross-examination. 


4 * 


ECHNIQUE #35 

The Broken Record 


Whenever someone persists in questioning you on an 
unwelcome subject, simply repeat your original 
response. Use precisely the same words in precisely the 
same tone of voice. Hearing it again usually quiets 
them down. If your rude interrogator hangs on like a 
leech, your next repetition never fails to flick them off. 



5^ How to Talk to a 
Celebrity 


Suppose you’ve just settled in for dinner at a nice restaurant. You 
look over at the next table, and who do you see? Is it really he? 
Could it possibly be? It’s gotta be a look-alike. No, it isn’t! It really 
is . . . Woody Allen. (Substitute any celebrity here: your favorite 
movie star, politician, broadcaster, boss who owns the company 
that owns the company you work for.) And there the celestial body 
is in the flesh, sitting not ten feet from you. What should you do? 

Nothing! Big shots don’t slobber over stars. Let the luminary 
enjoy a brief moment of anonymity. If he or she should cast a 
glance in your direction, give a smile and a nod. Then waft your 
gaze back to your dining companion. You will be a lot cooler in 
the eyes of your dinner partner if you take it all in your stride. 

Now, if you just can’t resist this once-in-a-lifetime opportu¬ 
nity to press the flesh of the megastar and tell him or her of your 
admiration, here’s how to do it with grace. Wait until you or the 
luminary are leaving the restaurant. After the check has been paid 
and you will obviously not be taking much of his or her time, you 
may make your approach. Say something like, “Mr. Allen, I just 
want to tell you how much pleasure your wonderful films have 
given me over the years. Thank you so much.” 


136 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Talk to a Celebrity zyy 


Did you pick up the subtlety here? You are not compliment¬ 
ing his work. “After all,” he might well ask himself, “who are you 
to judge whether I am a great filmmaker or not?” You can only 
speak from your own perspective. You do this by telling him how 
much pleasure his work has given you. 

If it’s your boss’s boss’s boss’s boss whom the fates have sent 
to bask in your adulation, do the same. Do not say “Bill” or “Mr. 
Gates, you really run a great company.” 

“Lowly geek,” he thinks, “who are you to judge?” Instead, tell 
him what an honor it is to work for him. Obviously this is not the 
moment to detail the intricacies of your improvements on image¬ 
editing software for digitizing photographs. 

Then let your body language express that if Woody or Bill or 
the other megastar wants to leave it at that, you are happy with 
the exchange. If, however, the megastar is captivated by you (or 
has had so much liquid merriment that he or she has decided to 
mingle with the masses tonight), then all bets are off. You’re on 
your own. Enjoy! Until you pick up the first body-language sign 
that they would like to end it. Think of yourself as a ballroom 
dance student waltzing with your teacher. He leads, you follow. 
And he tells you when the waltz is over. 

Incidentally, if the megastar is with a companion and your 
conversation goes on for more than a few moments, direct some 
comments at the companion. If the satellite is in such stellar com¬ 
pany, he or she is probably also an accomplished person. 

Felicia, a friend of mine, is a talented trial lawyer who is mar¬ 
ried to a local TV-show host. Because Tom is on television, peo¬ 
ple recognize him wherever they go, and Felicia gets ignored. 
Felicia tells me how frustrating it is, even for Tom. Whenever they 
go to a party, people gush all over Tom, and Felicia’s fascinating 
work hardly ever gets mentioned. She and Tom used to love going 
out to dinner, but now they hide out at home in the evenings. 



138 How to Talk to Anyone 


Why? Because they can’t stand the interruptions of overly effer¬ 
vescent fans. 

“I Love What You Used to Be 
[You Has-Been]” 

Another sensitivity: the film star is probably obsessed with his last 
film, the politician with her last election, a corporate mogul with 
his last takeover, an author with her last novel—and so forth. So 
when discussing the star’s, the politicians, the mogul’s, the author’s, 
or any VIP’s work, try to keep your comments to current or recent 
work. Telling Woody Allen how much you loved his 1980 film 
Stardust Memories would not endear you to him. “What about all 
my wonderful films since?” thinks he. Stick to the present or very 
recent past if possible. 

Technique #36 

Big Shots Don’t Slobber 

People who are VIPs in their own right don’t slobber 
over celebrities. When you are chatting with one, don’t 
compliment her work, simply say how much pleasure or 
insight it’s given you. If you do single out any one of 
the star’s accomplishments, make sure it’s a recent one, 
not a memory that’s getting yellow in her scrapbook. 

If the queen bee has a drone sitting with her, find a 
way to involve him in the conversation. 


A final celebrity codicil: Suppose you are fortunate enough to 
have one at your party. To shine some star light on your party, 
don’t ask the TV host to “say a few words.” Don’t ask the singer 



How to Talk to a Celebrity 139 


to sing a song. What looks effortless to the rest of us because they 
seem so comfortable performing is work for them. You wouldn’t 
ask an accountant guest to look over your books. Or a dentist to 
check out your third left molar. Let the dignitary drink. Let the 
luminary laugh. Celebrities are people, too, and they like their 
time off. 




How to Make Them 
Want to Thank You 


To wrap up our section on sounding like the big boys and big girls, 
here is a simple and gracious little maneuver. It not only signals 
people you’re a top communicator, but it encourages them to keep 
doing nice things for you. Or complimenting you. Or doing busi¬ 
ness with you. Or loving you. It is very short. It is very sweet. It 
is very simple. You can use it with everyone in your life. When it 
becomes instinctive, you’ll find yourself using it every day. 

Very simply, never let the phrase thank you stand naked and 
alone. Always make it thank you for something. People use the 
bare exposed “thank you” so often that people don’t even hear it 
anymore. When we buy the morning newspaper, we flash a naked 
“thank you” at the vendor when he gives us our nickel’s change. Is 
that the same “thank you” you want to give a valued customer who 
makes a big purchase in your store? Or a loved one who cooks you 
a delicious dinner? 

Whenever the occasion warrants more than an unconscious 
acknowledgment, dress up your “thank you” with the reason: 

Thank you for coming. 

Thank you for being so understanding. 


140 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Make Them Want to Thank You 141 


Thank you for waiting. 

Thank you for being such a good customer. 

Thank you for being so loving. 

Often, when I disembark an airplane, the captain and first 
officer are standing by the cockpit door to bid the passengers 
farewell. I say, “Thanks for getting us here.” Admittedly, that’s car- 
rying “Never the Naked Thank You” technique to extremes, but 
it has a surprising effect. They fall all over themselves with “Oh, 
thanks for flying with us!” 


Zb 


ECHNIQUE #37 

Never the Naked Thank You 


Never let the phrase “thank you” stand alone. From A 
to Z, always follow it with for: from “Thank you for 
asking” to “Thank you for zipping me up.” 


Thank you for reading this section of How to Talk to Anyone ! 
Now let us move on to another conversation challenge, how to talk 
knowledgeably with everyone—from groups of accountants to 
Zen Buddhists—no matter how little you might have in common. 



This page intentionally left blank. 



PART FOUR 

How to Be an Insider 
in Any Crowd 


What Are They All Talking About? 

Has it ever happened to you? Everyone at the party is speaking 
gobbledygook. They’re all discussing faulty audits, code con¬ 
straints, or the library market—and you have no idea what they’re 
talking about. It’s because everybody at the party is an accoun¬ 
tant, an architect, or a publisher—and you’re not. 

So you stand there with a pasty smile on your face, not open¬ 
ing your mouth. If you do, you fear the wrong thing will come 
out. Paranoia sets in. Everybody will snicker at you. You’re an out¬ 
sider. So you suffer in silence. 

In high school I suffered a massive case of Silent Outsider 
Syndrome, especially around males. All they wanted to talk about 
was cars. I knew nothing about cars. The only time I’d ever set 
foot in a “body shop” was to get a suntan. 

Well, one fateful day, Mama came home with a gift for me 
that transformed my teenage existence from shy to sociable. It was 
a book on all the current model cars and their differences over and 
under the hood. One reading, and I became fluent in Fords, 
Chevys, and Buicks. I no longer hyperventilated when boys said 
words like carburetor, alternator, camshaft, or exhaust manifold. I 

143 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



144 How to Talk to Anyone 


didn’t need to learn a lot, just enough to ask the right questions to 
get the guys talking. When I’d learned to speak “car” with the 
boys, it worked wonders for my social life. 

Cut to today. We grown-up boys and girls also have our 
favorite topics that usually involve our work or our hobbies. When 
we’re with people in our own field or who share our interests, we 
open up like small-town gossips. (Even engineers who have a con¬ 
stant case of cat-got-their-tongue start gabbing about greasy tur¬ 
bines and various projects when they’re together.) To outsiders, our 
conversation sounds like gobbledygook. But we know precisely 
what it’s about. It’s our own jobbeldygook or hobbydygook. 

You fear you’ll find yourself in a party of squash players when 
you’re the type of person who’d rather be in court than on court? 
Don’t panic hearing words like lobbing and hitting rails roll off the 
squash players’ tongues. So what if the only experience you’ve ever 
had with squash was the mashed acorn variety on your plate next 
to the turkey last Thanksgiving. All you need is the few techniques 
that follow. 

Just as anglers throw out a dragonfly to get the fish to bite, all 
you have to do is throw out the right questions to get people to 
open up. Dale Carnegie’s adage, “show sincere interest and people 
will talk,” only goes so far. As they say in poker, “it takes jacks or 
better to open.” And in conversation, it takes cursory knowledge 
or better about their field to get them to really open up. You must 
have knowledgeable curiosity, the kind that makes you sound like 
you’re worth talking to. 

In this section, we explore techniques that are “Open Sesames” 
to get people gabbing with you like an insider. 



3 $ How to Be a Modern- 
Day Renaissance Man 
or Woman 


Whenever friends visit my hometown, New York City, I warn 
them “Never ask anyone riding in the subway for directions.” 

“Because I’ll get mugged?” they fearfully ask. 

“No, just because you’ll never get where you’re going!” Most 
Big Apple subway riders know only two things about the subway: 
where they get on and where they get off. They know nothing about 
the rest of the system. Most people are like NYC strap-hangers 
when it comes to their hobbies and interests. They know their own 
pastimes, but all the others are like unvisited stations. 

My unmarried (and wishing she weren’t) friend Rita has a bad 
case of bowler’s thumb. Every Wednesday night she’s bowling up 
a storm with her friends. She is forever discussing her scores, her 
averages, and her high game. Another single and searching friend 
Walter is into white-water rafting. He talks endlessly with his pad¬ 
dling friends about which rivers he’s run, which outfitters he’s gone 
with, and which class rapids he prefers. Thinking my two single 
friends might hit it off, I introduced Walter the paddler to Rita 
the bowler and mentioned their respective passions. 

“Oh you’re a bowler!” said Walter. 

“Yes,” Rita smiled demurely, awaiting more questions about 
her big bowling turn-on. Walter was silent. 


H5 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



146 How to Talk to Anyone 


Masking her disappointment, Rita said, “Uh, Leil tells me 
you’re into water rafting.” Walter smiled proudly, awaiting further 
friendly interrogation on paddling. “Uh, that must be exciting. 
Isn’t it dangerous?” was the best Rita could do. 

“No, it’s not dangerous,” Walter patronizingly responded to 
her typical outsider’s question. Then the conversation died. 

During the deafening silence, I remember thinking, if Rita 
had run just one river, if Walter had bowled just one game, their 
lives might be different now. Conversation could have flowed, and 
who knows what else might have flowered. 


Go Fly a Kite! 

The “Scramble Therapy” technique is salvation from such disap¬ 
pointing encounters. It will transform you into a modern-day 
Renaissance man or woman who comfortably can discuss a vari¬ 
ety of interests. 

Scramble Therapy is, quite simply, scrambling up your life and 
participating in an activity you’d never think of indulging in. Just 
one out of every four weekends, do something totally out of your 
pattern. Do you usually play tennis on weekends? This weekend, 
go hiking. Do you usually go hiking? This weekend, take a ten¬ 
nis lesson. Do you bowl? Leave that to your buddies this time. 
Instead, go white-water rafting. Oh, you were planning on run¬ 
ning some rapids like you do every warm weekend? Forget it, go 
bowling. 

Go to a stamp exhibition. Go to a chess lecture. Go balloon¬ 
ing. Go bird-watching. Go to a pool hall. Go kayaking. Go fly a 
kite! Why? Because it will give you conversational fodder for the 
rest of your life. From that weekend on, you’ll sound like an 
insider with all the hikers, stamp collectors, ballooners, birders, 
billiards players, kayakers, and kitists you ever meet. Just by doing 
their activity once. 



How to Be a Modern-Day Renaissance Man or Woman 147 


If you take a piece of blue litmus paper and dip it in a huge 
vat of acid, the tip turns pink. If you take another blue litmus paper 
and dip it into just one minuscule drop of acid on a glass slide, the 
tip turns just as pink. Compare this to participating in an activity 
just one time. A sampling gives you 80 percent of the conversa¬ 
tional value. You learn the insider’s questions to ask. You start using 
the right terms. You’ll never be at a loss again when the subject of 
extracurricular interests comes up—which it always does. 


Do You Speak Scuba? 

I’m not a certified scuba diver. However, six years ago in Bermuda 
I saw a sign: “Resort Dives, $25, no Scuba experience necessary.” 
In just three hours, I received the best crash course in talking with 
scuba divers the world offers. 

First I was given a quick lesson in the pool. Then, struggling 
to stay erect under the weight of my oxygen tank, regulator, buoy¬ 
ancy compensator, and weight belt, I went clumping out to the 
dive boat. Sitting there on the rocking dinghy, fondling my mask 
and fins like worry beads, I overheard the certified divers asking 
each other insider questions: 

“Where were you certified '?” 

“Where have you dived ?” 

“Do you prefer wrecks or reefisT 

“Ever done any night diving ?’ 

“Are you into underwater photography ?” 

“Do you dive on a computer ?” 

“What’s your longest bottom time ?” 

“Did you ever get the bendsT ’ 



148 How to Talk to Anyone 


Why the italicized words? Those are scuba lingo. I now speak 
scuba. To this day, whenever I meet divers, I have the right ques¬ 
tions to ask and subjects to discuss. And the right ones to avoid. 
(Like how much I like seafood. That’s like telling a cat lover how 
much you love tender barbecued kitten.) I can now ask my new 
friends which of the scuba hot spots they’ve been to—Cozumel, 
Cayman, Cancun. Then, if I want to really show off, I ask if 
they’ve been to Truk Lagoon in the Far Pacific, the Great Barrier 
Reef in Australia, or the Red Sea. 

All the insider terms now roll comfortably off my tongue. 
Before my Scramble Therapy experience I’d be calling their 
beloved wrecks and reefs “sunken ships” and “coral.” Under¬ 
standable words, but not scuba words. Not insider words. Upon 
meeting a scuba diver, I probably would have asked, “Oh scuba 
diving. That must be interesting. Uh, aren’t you afraid of sharks?” 
Not a good way to get off on the right fin with a diver. 


-V 


ECHNIQUE 


#38 


Scramble Therapy 


Once a month, scramble your life. Do something you’d 
never dream of doing. Participate in a sport, go to an 
exhibition, hear a lecture on something totally out of 
your experience. You get 80 percent of the right lingo 
and insider questions from just one exposure. 


Think about it! Suppose at a dinner party, the table conversa¬ 
tion turns to scuba diving. If you, too, had done your one-time- 
only dive, you’d ask your diving dinner companion if he likes night 
diving or whether he prefers diving on wrecks or reefs. (He’ll never 



How to Be a Modern-Day Renaissance Man or Woman 149 


believe it when you tell him the deepest water you’ve ever sub¬ 
merged yourself in is your own bathtub.) 

Then you turn to the bungee jumper seated on your left and 
ask him, “Do you prefer chest-waist jumps or ankle jumps?” If the 
conversation then changes to tennis, or martial arts, or chess, or 
coin collecting, or even bird-watching, you can keep up and keep 
the conversation going. What a guy! What a gal! 



# How to Sound Like You 
know All About Their 
Job or Hobby 


Even more insidious than hobby-talk is job-speak, or “Jobbledy- 
gook.” I still harbor social nightmares of the evening I attended a 
party thrown by a couple who worked in computer database man¬ 
agement. As I walked in the door, I overheard one chap saying to 
another, “When the domain relational calculus is restricted to safe 
expressions, it’s equivalent to the turple relational. ...” 

That’s all I stayed around for. I knew I wasn’t going to under¬ 
stand one bit or byte of conversation the rest of the evening. It 
made me long for the days when a mouse meant the furry little 
fellow who loves cheese, windows were the kind you bought 
drapes for, and the web was something spiders trapped flies in. I 
knew I was going to need some technical support if I was going 
to be compatible with this crowd. 

I decided then and there to learn some of the opening ques¬ 
tions database management types ask each other. Which I did. 
Now I can’t wait for a second chance at that crowd because I’m 
armed with questions like “What raid level are you using?” and 
“What data warehousing product do you use?” 

All you need are a few insider opening questions to get you 
started with any group. You ask questions, listen to the responses, 
and indulge in elementary on-target conversation with them for a 


ISO 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Sound Like You Know All About Their Job or Hobby iyi 


moment or two about their field. (Then change the subject ASAP! 
You don’t want to fake you are more knowledgeable about their 
field than you really are.) 


It’s All in the Opening Question 

A tennis player can tell immediately from just appraising your 
opening serve how good a player you are. Is it going to be great 
playing with you or a real bore? It’s the same in communicating. 
Just from your verbal opening serve, someone knows if it’s going 
to be interesting talking with you about their life or interests—or 
dull, dull, dull. 

For example, suppose I’m introduced to someone and the first 
words out of her mouth are, “Oh, you’re a writer. When are you 
going to write the great American novel?” Yikes, I know I’m talk¬ 
ing with someone who is unfamiliar with my world. We’ll chat, but 
I prefer to change the subject. And soon, my conversation partner. 

If, however, my new acquaintance says, “Oh you’re a writer. 
Do you write fiction or nonfiction?” Bingo! Now I know I’m with 
a person who knows about my world. Why? Because that is the 
first question all writers ask each other. I enjoy talking to this 
inquisitor because I presume she has more insights into the writ¬ 
ing world. Even if we quickly get off the subject of writing, she 
has come across as a well-informed individual. 

Every job, every sport, every interest has insider opening ques¬ 
tions that everybody in the same field asks—and its dumb out¬ 
sider questions that they never ask each other. When an astronaut 
meets another astronaut, he asks, “What missions have you been 
on?” (Never “How do you go to the bathroom up there?”) A den¬ 
tist asks another dentist, “Are you in general practice or do you 
have a specialty?” (Never “Heard any good pain jokes lately?”) 

The good news is beginning Jobbledygook is an easy language. 
You don’t need to master buzzwords, only a few opening questions 



i$2 How to Talk to Anyone 


to make you sound like an insider. Then—here’s the fun part— 
when you tell them you’re not connected to their field, they’re all 
the more impressed. “What a knowledgeable person!” they say to 
themselves. 

“Help! Everybody There Will Be 
an Artist” 

It’s not hard to harvest good Jobbledygook. Let’s say you’ve been 
invited to a gallery opening where you’ll be meeting many artists. 
If you don’t speak artist, go through your Rolodex to see if you 
have an artist friend or two. 

Aha, you found one. Well, sort of. Your friend Sally attended 
art school. You call her up and ask, “Sally, I know this sounds silly 
but I ’ve been invited to an event where I’m bound to be talking 
with a lot of artists. Could you give me a few good questions to 
ask?” Sally might find your query a tad unusual, but your diligence 
should impress her. 

Maybe she’ll say, “Well, ask artists what medium they work in.” 

“Medium?” you ask. 

“Sure,” she’ll tell you. “That’s the insider’s way to ask if they 
work with acrylics, oil, charcoal, pen, and so forth.” 

“Oh.” 

“Don’t ask artists to describe their work,” she warns. “They 
feel theirs is a visual medium that can’t be described.” 

“Oh.” 

“And don’t ask them if their work is in a gallery.” 

“Oh?” 

“That could be a sore point. Instead ask ‘Is there anyplace I 
might see your work?’ They’ll love that because, even if they’re 
not represented by a gallery, they can invite you to their studio to 
possibly buy their work.” 



How to Sound Like You Know All About Their Job or Hobby 153 


A. 


ECHNIQUE #39 

Learn a Little Jobbledygook 


Big winners speak Jobbledygook as a second language. 
What is Jobbledygook? It’s the language of other 
professions. 

Why speak it? It makes you sound like an insider. 

How do you learn it? You’ll find no Jobbledygook 
cassettes in the language section of your bookstore, but 
the lingo is easy to pick up. Simply ask a friend who 
speaks the lingo of the crowd you’ll be with to teach 
you a few opening questions. The words are few and 
the rewards are manifold. 


That’s all you need to get started—two good opening art 
questions and a warning against the most-asked dumb outsider 
question. 

Let’s say you’ve given a great opening serve with the right 
question on their job. You’ve slammed a swift ball dead center into 
their conversational court. Happily, thinking they’re with an ace 
player, they answer your question. Then they put a little spin on 
the ball and send it lobbing right back into your court and it’s time 
for a follow-up question. Whoops, what to do now? 

If you don’t want to come out of the bluffer’s closet just yet, 
you must master the next technique, “Baring Their Hot Button.” 



40 How to Bare Their Hot 
Button (Elementary 
Doc-Talk) 


My friend John, a physician, recently married a charming Japa¬ 
nese woman, Yamika. John told me the first time they were invited 
to a party to meet many of John’s colleagues, Yamika was panic- 
stricken. She wanted to make a good impression, yet she was tense 
about talking to American doctors. John was the only one she’d 
ever met, and during their romance they didn’t spend a whole lot 
of time discussing medicine. 

John told her, “Don’t worry about it, Yami. They all ask each 
other the same old questions. When you meet them, just ask, 
What’s your specialty’ and Are you affiliated with a hospital?’ 

“Then, to get into deeper conversation,” he continued, “throw 
out questions like ‘How’s your relationship with your hospital?’ or 
‘How’s the current medical environment affecting you?’ These are 
hot issues with doctors because everything’s changing in health 
care.” 

John said Yamika delivered the lines verbatim. She circulated 
the party asking the various doctors’ specialties and inquiring 
about their affiliations and relationships with their hospitals. As a 
result, she was the hit of the party. Many of John’s colleagues later 
congratulated him on having found such a charming and insight¬ 
ful woman. 


154 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Bare Their Hot Button (Elementary Doc-Talk) 155 


Getting the Real Grabber 

It’s not just doctors. Every profession has concerns that are all the 
buzz within the industry. The rest of the world, however, knows 
little about these fixations. For example, independent booksellers 
constantly complain that big superstore chains are taking over the 
industry. Accountants lie awake nights worrying about liability 
insurance for faulty audits. And dentists grind their teeth over 
OSHA and EPA regulations. Oh, us writers, too. Were always 
bellyaching about magazines not paying us for electronic rights to 
our precious words. 

Suppose some hapless soul were unlucky enough to find him¬ 
self in a party of writers. Making conversation with these folks 
(who seldom know what they think until they see what they say) 
is no easy task for one who is accustomed to communicating in 
the spoken word. However, if before the party the nonwriter had 
called just one writer acquaintance and asked about the burning 
issues, he’d have had hot conversation with the wordsmiths all eve¬ 
ning. I call the technique “Baring Their Hot Button.” 




ECHNIQUE #40 

Baring Their Hot Button 


Before jumping blindly into a bevy of bookbinders or a 
drove of dentists, find out what the hot issues are in 
their fields. Every industry has burning concerns the 
outside world knows little about. Ask your informant to 
bare the industry buzz. Then, to heat the conversation 
up, push those buttons. 


Back to the art show you’re about to attend. You can’t let Sally 
hang up yet. She’s given you the two best opening questions for 



156 How to Talk to Anyone 


artists. But don’t let her go until you get the real conversational 
grabber. Ask her the hottest issues going on in the art world. She 
might think a minute and then say, “Well, there’s always art prices.” 

“Art prices?” you ask. 

“Yes,” she explains. “For example, in the 1980s the art world 
was very market-driven. Prices went sky-high because some 
investors and status seekers paid exorbitant amounts. We feel that 
kind of took art away from the masses.” 

Wow, now you’re really armed with some good insider art talk! 

See You at the Big One! 

While you’re at it, don’t forget to grill your informant for special 
insider greetings to use when you’re with their gang. For example, 
actresses cringe if they hear “good luck” before a show, but they 
smile at well-wishers who say “Break a leg!” 

“Break a leg,” however, is not appropriate for runners before 
a marathon. That’s the last thought they want to have! The only 
thing they want to break is their personal record. Try “Have a per¬ 
sonal best!” 

Firefighters who work on shift seldom see each other except, 
of course, at the biggest blazes. Thus the firefighters’ greeting “See 
ya at the big one!” 

Once, driving in a sleepy town you’d have to work at getting 
lost in, I succeeded. I was hopelessly turned around. Happily, I 
spotted the firehouse and a couple of bored firefighters lounging 
out front. 

“Excuse me, can you tell me the way back to Route 50?” I 
called out the window. I could tell from their attitude they thought 
I was an idiot. Nevertheless, they lethargically pointed me in the 
right direction. As I drove off, I called out, “Thanks guys, see ya 
at the big one!” In the rearview mirror I saw huge smiles break out 
on their faces as they stood up in unison and waved good-bye. The 
disoriented dizzy blond driving off had won their respect with 
their insider salute. 




How to Secretly Learn 
About Their Lives 


Let’s say your paper carrier has just hurled the newspaper from his 
bike to your front door. You pour a cup of coffee and get com¬ 
fortable to catch up on what’s happening in the world. Your world, 
that is. Do you flip first to the international news? The fashion sec¬ 
tion? The sports page? The entertainment section? Maybe the 
comics? 

Whichever section you usually flip to first, tomorrow DON’T. 
Turn to any other section, preferably one you hardly ever read. 
Why? Because it will familiarize you with other worlds so that you 
can soon discuss anything with anybody, no matter how little you 
have in common. 

How about the real estate section? Yawn. Maybe you don’t 
find real estate especially engrossing. However, sooner or later 
you’re going to find yourself with a group of people who are dis¬ 
cussing properties, deals, and today’s market. Scanning the real 
estate section just once every few weeks will keep you au courant 
with their conversation. 

The advertising column? Maybe you think the world would 
be a far, far better place without Madison Avenue. But your bot¬ 
tom line won’t be better off if you can’t hold your own discussing 
matters with the marketing maven you’ve just contracted to adver- 


L57 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



158 How to Talk to Anyone 


tise your company’s widgets. Just a few peeks at the advertising 
news section and you’ll soon be chatting about campaigns and cre¬ 
ative people, and doing print or TV Instead of saying words, you’ll 
be saying copy. Instead of the agency, you’ll be bandying about real 
insider terms like the shop. 

Using outsider words is one of the biggest giveaways that you 
are not in the know. On the ship, if a passenger asked any of my 
staff, “How long have you been working on the boat?” they’d 
squelch a groan. Cruise staffers proudly worked on a ship, and the 
word boat revealed the passenger as a real landlubber. 

The right word can perform conversational miracles. In the 
receiving line, whenever passengers asked our laconic captain, 
“When did you first become a master?” or “What was your first 
command?” he would hold up the entire line of people snaking 
around the ballroom waiting to shake his hand. Captain Cafiero 
would enthusiastically recount his naval history to the savvy 
inquirer who might have just learned the words master or com¬ 
mand last week in the newspaper shipping notices. (If the passen¬ 
ger had simply said, “How long have you been a captain?” or 
“What was your first boat?” he or she would have gotten the cap¬ 
tain’s usual Italian gentleman’s version of the bum’s rush.) 

Soon you’ll become addicted to the high that establishing rap¬ 
port with so many people gives you. All it takes is reading differ¬ 
ent sections of the newspaper. 


Pump Their Pulp for Even More Fuel 

Then, when you crave a bigger hit of insider lingo, start reading 
trade journals. Those are the closed-circulation magazines that go 
to members of various industries. Ask your friends in different jobs 
to lend you one so you’ll have even more fuel for the conversa¬ 
tional fire. 

All industries have one or two. You’ll see big glossy rags with 
names like Automotive News, Restaurant Business, Pool and Spa 



How to Secretly Learn About Their Lives iyp 


News, Trucking Industry, and even Hogs Today for people in the pig 
business. (Excuse me, they call themselves “swine practitioners.” 
Hey, you never know when, to make your next big sale, it will help 
to speak pig.) Any one issue will give you a sample of their lingo 
and inform you of the hottest issues in that field. 

When it comes to people’s hobbies and interests, browse 
through magazines on running, working out, bicycling, skiing, 
swimming, and surfing. Large magazine stores carry biker rags, 
boxer rags, bowler rags, even bull-riding rags. You’ll find thousands 
of special-interest magazines published every month. 

Several years ago, I got hooked on buying a different one each 
week. It paid off quickly when a potential consulting client invited 
me to dinner at her home. She had a beautiful garden and, thanks 
to Flower and Garden Magazine, I could throw out insider terms 
like ornamentals, annuals, and perennials. I could even keep up 
when the discussion turned to the advantages of growing from 
seeds or bulbs. 

Because I was so fluent in “flower,” she invited me to take a 
longer walk with her to see her private back gardens. As we 




ECHNIQUE #41 

Read Their Rags 


Is your next big client a golfer, runner, swimmer, surfer, 
or skier? Are you attending a social function filled with 
accountants or Zen Buddhists—or anything in between? 
There are untold thousands of monthly magazines 
serving every imaginable interest. You can dish up more 
information than you’ll ever need to sound like an 
insider with anyone just by reading the rags that serve 
their racket. (Have you read your latest copy of 
Zoonooz yet?) 



160 How to Talk to Anyone 


strolled, I gradually changed the subject from chrysanthemums to 
the consulting work I could do for her company. Who was lead¬ 
ing whom down the garden path? 

Is the world getting smaller, or are we getting bigger? Today’s 
Renaissance man or woman is comfortable and confident any¬ 
where. The next technique helps you be an insider wherever you 
find yourself on the planet, and it saves you from fulfilling the 
world’s fantasy of “the ugly American.” 



How to Talk When 
You’re in Other 
Countries 

Say you’re traveling abroad on business and you want to be a 
“global insider.” What’s the first thing on your to-do list? Get a 
passport and a phrase book, right? After all, who wants to wander 
around Rome not knowing how to ask for a restroom? Or be 
thirsty in Kuala Lumpur not knowing how to ask for a soda? How¬ 
ever, there’s something most of us forget to pack, often with dire 
consequences—a book on international customs. 

A friend of mine, a fellow speaker named Geraldine, was 
excited about her first speech in Japan. To be comfy on her long 
flight to Tokyo, she donned her favorite designer jeans and a casual 
jacket. Fourteen hours and 6,737 rniles later, four impeccably 
dressed Japanese gentlemen greeted her at Narita Airport. Smil¬ 
ing and bowing low, they handed her their business cards. With 
her carry-on bag in one hand, Geri took their cards with the other. 
She thanked them, glanced briefly at the cards, and packed them 
safely into her back pocket. She then pulled one of her business 
cards out of her purse and, sensitive to the fact that they might 
have difficulty pronouncing Geraldine, wrote her nickname “Geri” 
above her printed name. The gentlemen hovered over her card, 
turning it over to examine it a few times, before one of them put 
it in his briefcase. 


161 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



162 How to Talk to Anyone 


When the five of them arrived at the hotel, they invited Geri 
for tea in the lobby. While sipping tea, the gentlemen presented 
her with a small gift which she eagerly opened. One of Geri’s most 
charming qualities is her instinctive warmth and effusiveness. She 
was thrilled with the gift and, in typical Geri style, she squealed, 
“Oh, it’s beautiful!” as she gave each of the gentlemen a little hug. 

At this point, the four Japanese gentlemen stood up in uni¬ 
son like four frowning Siamese twins and, bowing only very 
slightly, mumbled “Sayonara” and promptly left. Poor Geri was 
flabbergasted. What did she do wrong? 

Everything! First, the jeans. Even if you’re coming off a bicy¬ 
cle in Asia, you do not meet clients casually dressed. The second 
mistake was Geri’s vulgar handling of their business cards. In Asia, 
the business card is one of the most important protocol tools. It 
is always presented and accepted reverently with both hands. 
(Except in Moslem Asia where the left hand is considered 
unclean.) 

Geri then put their cards away much too quickly. In Asia, peo¬ 
ple use business cards as a conversation starter. You chat about each 
other’s cards and work and do not put theirs away until they gen¬ 
tly and respectfully place yours in safekeeping. Shoving it into her 
back jeans pocket was the ultimate disrespect. 

Geri didn’t discover her fourth gaffe until she returned home. 
One of her colleagues Bill, a seasoned business traveler, analyzed 
the fiasco for her. Bill told her the reason the gentlemen had turned 
Geraldine’s card over and over when she gave it to them at the air¬ 
port was to find her name, title, and company printed in Japanese 
on the other side. The flip side of Geri’s card was, of course, blank. 

Then, fifth horror of horrors, Geri should not have written on 
the card. Cards in Asia are not exactly sacred, but one should never 
deface them with messy handwriting. 

The sad tale of Geri and the Japanese gets worse. Bill broke 
the bad news to her: she should not have opened the gift in front 



Hoiv to Talk When You’re in Other Countries 163 


of her clients. Why? Because in a land where saving face is criti¬ 
cal, it would be embarrassing to discover the gift they gave was 
not as nice as the one they received. (Yikes, Geri hadn’t even given 
them a gift!) Gaffe number seven. 

Geri’s little squeal when receiving the gift was also a boo-boo. 
In Asia, the lower the tone of voice, the higher the rank. The final 
flub was, of course, giving the gentlemen a thank-you hug. Hug¬ 
ging, highly revered in certain parts of the world is, in Japan, abso¬ 
lutely unacceptable with a new client. 

Needless to say, Geri has not been invited back to Japan. 
However, she does have a gig coming up in El Salvador. This time 
she’s smart. She’s studying up on the customs there. Happily, she’s 
finding she can hug to her heart’s content. However she shouldn’t 
use her (or anybody else’s) first name. Oh, and she must not intro¬ 
duce herself as an “American.” After all, Salvadorans are Ameri¬ 
cans, too! 

The differences ’round the world go on and on. Whenever I 
travel, I have to hit myself over the head and realize I’m not in the 
anything-goes of USA. I love to travel in jeans, I’m an incurable 
hugger, and I can’t wait to see what’s in a gift box anybody gives 
me. However, whenever I plan to leave Uncle Sam’s shores, I check 
on foreign customs to see how much of myself I can be. 


-1 


ECHNIQUE #42 

Clear “Customs” 


Before putting one toe on foreign soil, get a book on 
dos and taboos around the world. Before you shake 
hands, give a gift, make gestures, or even compliment 
anyone’s possessions, check it out. Your gaffe could gum 
up your entire gig. 



164 How to Talk to Anyone 


There are some excellent books on international customs. 
You’ll find the names of a few in the notes. 17-19 

Don’t be like another hapless colleague of mine who almost 
blew a big business deal with a Brazilian. Just before signing the 
contract, he gave the OK sign with his thumb and forefinger. Lit¬ 
tle did he know he was telling his new business partner to go have 
intercourse with himself. You never know until it’s too late. 

Now we come to where being an insider shows immediate, 
tangible, and calculable rewards. And where being an outsider 
really hurts—right in your pocket or purse. 



43 How to Talk Them into 
Getting the “Insiders 
Price” (on Practically 
Anything You Buy) 


Never underestimate human ingenuity when it comes to getting 
what you want. Many people expand the adage, “All’s fair in love 
and war” to “All is fair in love, war, and buying what I want.” To 
get a table at a posh restaurant on a busy night, using a celebrity 
name is an old ploy. My favorite maitre d’ told me he gets a lot of 
Robert De Niros phoning in a reservation. When their party of 
six or eight arrives, he hears, “I’m so sorry, Rob wasn’t feeling well 
this evening.” 

One woman, frustrated when her fake celebrity name didn’t 
work, shouted at him, “Look, who the hell do I have to be to get a 
table? I’ll be anyone you want me to be, Goldie Hawn, Steffi Graf, 
Fergie—just tell me.” Some people try a last-minute approach. 
They simply walk up to the maitre d’ at an overbooked restaurant, 
point to any name on the reservation book and say, “That’s us.” 

You’ll witness the same cunning at overbooked hotels. Several 
months ago I was checking into a popular hotel for which, fortu¬ 
nately, I had a confirmed reservation. A loudmouthed man in front 


165 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



166 How to Talk to Anyone 


of me in line shouted at the desk clerk, “Whaddaya mean, no room? 
I’m staying in this hotel tonight. If you don’t have a room, I’m sleep¬ 
ing right here on the floor.” His temper tantrum was not working. 

“And I warn you,” he continued, “I sleep in the nude!” 

He got a room. 

These crafty childish tactics are not recommended. Rather, I 
suggest a more principled technique called “Bluffing for Bargains.” 
It was born one afternoon sitting with an insurance broker Mr. 
Carson. He was trying to sell me a homeowners policy. Of course 
I wanted the most coverage for the least cash. Carson was a 
smooth operator and he was patiently explaining to me in layman’s 
terms the benefits of certain riders he was pushing. 

Just as he started discussing disasters like wars and hurricanes, 
his phone rang. With apologies, he picked up the receiver. It was 
one of his colleagues. Suddenly a metamorphosis took place before 
my eyes. The sophisticated salesman became a palsy-walsy, regu¬ 
lar, down-home kinda guy chatting it up with his old buddy about 
umbrellas. I thought they were discussing the weather. 

Then the conversation turned to floaters. I now assumed they 
were talking about an eye problem. It took a while for me to real¬ 
ize that umbrella policies and floaters were part of the insurancese 
they were speaking. 

A few minutes later, Carson said, “Yeah, OK, so long, buddy,” 
and put the phone down. He cleared his throat and again trans¬ 
mogrified back into the formal sales agent patiently defining dam¬ 
ages and deductibles to a naive client. 

Sitting there listening to bafflegab like subrogation and pro 
rata liability, I began to ponder, “If Carson’s colleague who just 
called wanted to buy insurance, he would have gotten a much 
better policy, much cheaper.” In practically every industry, ven¬ 
dors give two prices on goods or services—one to insiders and 
one to you and me. 



How to Talk Them into Getting the “Insider’s Price” 167 


Before I let myself get angry about this, I thought it through. 
Is it unfair? Not really. If the vendor doesn’t have to spend time 
being salesman or psychologist answering the endless stream of 
novice questions, he can afford to give his best price. Carson 
wouldn’t have had to take twenty minutes explaining to his col¬ 
league (as he did to me) why, if a tornado takes your house, it’s 
considered “an act of God.” Therefore, you lose. When knowl¬ 
edgeable associates buy products, the vendor is happily reduced to 
nothing more than a purchasing agent. For very little work, he 
makes a small profit and is satisfied. 

A little bit of knowledge goes a long way when you’re buying 
something. If you have insight into your real estate broker’s bot¬ 
tom line, he’s more apt to give you the better price. If you are facile 
with the insider words caterers and car salesmen use to pad their 
profits, if you’re savvy to techniques moving companies and 
mechanics use to bilk the unsuspecting, if you are on the lookout 
for lawyers’ methods of fattening fees—in short, if you know the 
ropes, you will not get ripped off. You don’t need to know a lot, 
just a few insider terms. The pro assumes, since you are conver¬ 
sant in some esoteric industry terms, you also know the best deal 
and rock-bottom price. 

No one put it better than my housepainter, Iggy. “Sure,” he 
told me, “you gotta know how to talk to a painter. Not me, but a 
lotta them other guys, they’re gonna get whatever they can. It’s only 
human nature. Especially if you’re a woman and you deal with ’em 
smart, like I’m gonna tell you how, their hair will stand on end. 
They’ll say to themselves, ‘Hey, dis is no babe in the woods. I bet¬ 
ter deal straight.’ ” 

“OK, Iggy, how?” 

He said, “Tell them guys, ‘Look the walls need very little prep- 
ping. You’re not going to have to spend much time scraping and 
spackling. It’s a clean job.’ ” Iggy told me these few sentences alone 



168 How to Talk to Anyone 


can save you hundreds of dollars. Why? Right away the painter 
knows you know the score and that the most time-consuming part 
for him is preparing the surface (prepping in painterese). There¬ 
fore, it’s his biggest markup item. 

“Then,” Iggy continued, “when you tell ’em there will be no 
cutting in [painting two colors next to each other], your price goes 
down again. Be sure and tell ’em not to leave any holidays 
[unpainted or sparsely painted spots] and you get a more careful 
job.” I’m only sorry I don’t have an Iggy in every field to give me 
a crash course in how to deal. 

How to Deal When There’s No Iggy 
in Your Life 

Here’s how to get the best price and the best deal from anyone. 
Find your Iggy Informer. If you have a friend in the business, get 
the lingo from him. If not, instead of going straight to the vendor 
you want to buy from, visit several others first. Talk with them. 
Learn a little lingo from each. 

For instance, suppose you want to buy a diamond. Instead of 
going right to your favorite jewelry shop and asking dumbbell dia¬ 
mond questions, go to the competition. Make friends with the 
salesclerk and pick up a few gems of diamondese. You’ll learn jew¬ 
elers say stones, not diamonds. When you’re talking about the top 
of the stone, they say table-, the widest part is the girdle-, the bot¬ 
tom is the cutlet. If the stone looks yellow, don’t say yellow, say 
cape. If you see flaws, don’t say flaws, say inclusions or gletz. If you 
still don’t like the stone, don’t say “I’d like to see something bet¬ 
ter ,say finer. (Don’t ask me why. That’s just the way the diamond 
crowd talks.) 

Then, when you’ve got your lingo down, go to where you 
want to buy. Because you now speak diamond, you get a much 
better price. 



How to Talk Them into Getting the “Insider’s Price” 169 




ECHNIQUE #43 

Bluffing for Bargains 


The haggling skills used in ancient Arab markets are 
alive and well in contemporary America for big-ticket 
items. Your price is much lower when you know how 
to deal. 

Before every big purchase, find several vendors—a 
few to learn from and one to buy from. Armed with a 
few words of industryese, you’re ready to head for the 
store where you’re going to buy. 


Soon you’ll be asking furriers where the skins were dressed, 
moving companies for their ICC performance record, and lawyers 
the hourly rate of paralegals and associates. Then these folks, like 
Iggy the painter, will say to themselves, “Hey, dis is no babe in the 
woods—I better deal straight.” 

Let us now delve deeper into the world of being an insider. 
This time we explore how to give your conversation partner the 
sense that you share not only experiences but the heavy stuff. You 
share beliefs and values in life. 



This page intentionally left blank. 



PART FIVE 

How to Sound 
Like You’re Peas 
in a Pod 

“Why, Were Just Alike!” 

If you squint your eyes and look up carefully at a flight of birds, 
you’ll see finches flying with finches, swallows soaring with swal¬ 
lows, and yellow birds winging it with yellow birds. The avian 
apartheid escalates. You’ll never see a barn swallow with a bank 
swallow, or even a yellow bird hanging out with a yellow finch. 
Somebody said it shorter: Birds of a feather flock together. 

Happily, humans are smarter than birds. In one respect, at 
least: we have brains capable of overcoming bias. Really smart 
human beings work together, play together, and break bread 
together. Does that mean their comfort level is high? Well, that 
depends on the human being. Our purpose here is not to exam¬ 
ine the absurdity of apartheid. It is to leave no stone unturned in 
making sure people are completely comfortable doing business or 
pleasure with you. 

It has been proven beyond a doubt, people are most recep¬ 
tive to those they feel have the same values in life. In one study, 

I 7 I 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



ij2 How to Talk to Anyone 


individuals were first given a personality and beliefs test. 20 They 
were then paired off with a partner and told to go spend time 
together. Before meeting, half the couples were told they were very 
similar in beliefs to their partner. The other half were told they 
were dissimilar. Neither statement was true. 

However, when quizzed afterward on how much they liked 
each other, partners who believed they were similar liked each 
other a lot more than the couples who thought themselves to be 
dissimilar, demonstrating we have a predisposition toward people 
we believe are just like us. We are most comfortable giving our 
business and friendship to those we feel share our values and 
beliefs in life. To that end I offer six techniques to create sensa¬ 
tions of similarity with everyone you wish. 

Along with making more profound rapport with customers, 
friends, and associates, using the following techniques develops a 
deeper understanding and empathy with people of all races and 
backgrounds. It also opens doors that might otherwise be closed 
to you. 



44 How to Make Them 
Feel You’re of the 
Same “Gass” 


Just like the finch flaps its wings faster than the gliding eagle, peo¬ 
ple of different backgrounds move differently. For example, West¬ 
erners used to the wide-open plains stand farther from each other. 
Easterners, systematically sardined into subways and crowded 
busses, stand closer. Asian Americans make modest movements. 
Italian Americans make massive ones. 

At teatime, the finishing-school set genuflects and gracefully 
lowers derrieres onto the sofa. When the ladies reach for a cup, 
they hold the saucer in one hand and the cup in the other, pinkie 
ever so slightly extended. Folks who never finished any manners 
school make a fanny dive in the middle of the sofa and clutch the 
cup with both hands. 

Is one right? Is the other wrong? No. However, top commu¬ 
nicators know when doing business with a derriere-dipping pinkie 
extender or a fanny-plopping, two-fisted mug grabber, they darn 
well should do the same. People feel comfortable around people 
who move just like they do. 

I have a friend who travels the country giving an outrageous 
seminar called “How to Marry the Rich.” Genie was once in a Las 
Vegas casino when a television reporter asked if she could tell the 
real rich from the great pretenders. 


173 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



iy4 How to Talk to Anyone 


“Of course,” Genie answered. 

“All right,” challenged the reporter. “Who is the wealthiest 
man in this room?” Convened at the next table were three men in 
tailored suits (Hayward of Mayfair, London, no doubt), hand¬ 
made shirts (Charvet of Place Vendome in Paris, no doubt), and 
sipping scotch (single-malt Laphroaig from the Scottish island of 
Islay, no doubt). The reporter, naturally, assumed Genie would 
choose one of these likely candidates. 

Instead, with the scrutiny of a hunting dog, Genie’s eyes 
scanned the room. Like a trained basset hound, she instinctively 
pointed a long red fingernail at a fellow in torn jeans at a corner 
table. She murmured, “He’s very rich.” 

Flabbergasted, the reporter asked Genie, “How can you tell?” 
“He moves like old money,” she said. “You see,” Genie went 
on to explain, “there’s moving like old money. There’s moving like 
new money. And there’s moving like no money.” Genie could tell 
the unlikely chap in the corner was obviously sitting on big assets 
and all because of the way he moved. 

YK 

Technique #44 

Be a Copyclass 

Watch people. Look at the way they move. Small 
movements? Big movements? Fast? Slow? Jerky? Fluid? 

Old? Young? Classy? Trashy? 

Pretend the pers
on you are talking to is your dance 
instructor. Is he a jazzy mover? Is she a balletic mover? 

Watch his or her body, then imitate the style of 
movement. That makes your conversation partner 
subliminally real comfy with you. 



How to Make Them Feel You’re of the Same “Class” iy$ 


They’re Buying You, Too 

If you’re in sales, copy not only your customer’s class but the class 
of your product as well. I live in a section of New York City called 
Soho, which is a few blocks above the famous-for-being-trashy 
Canal Street. Often, clutching my purse tightly and dodging the 
crowds on Canal Street, I’ll pass a pickpocket-turned-salesman- 
for-the-day. He furtively looks around and flashes a greasy hand¬ 
kerchief at me with a piece of jewelry on it. “Psst, wanna buy a 
gold chain?” His nervous thief’s demeanor alone could get him 
arrested. 

Now, about sixty blocks uptown, you’ll find the fashionable 
and very expensive Tiffany’s jewelry store. Occasionally, clutching 
my fantasies of being able to afford something therein, I stroll 
through the huge gilt doors. Imagine one of the impeccably 
dressed sales professionals behind the beveled glass counters 
furtively looking around and saying to me, “Psst, wanna buy a 
diamond?” 

No sale! 

Match your personality to your product. Selling handmade 
suits? A little decorum please. Selling jeans? A little cool, please. 
Selling sweat suits? A little sporty, please. And so on for whatever 
you’re selling. Remember, you are your customers’ buying experi¬ 
ence. Therefore you are part of the product they’re buying. 



45 How to Make Them 
Feel That You’re 
Like “Family” 


Have you ever been gabbing with a new acquaintance and, after a 
few moments, you’ve said to yourself, “This person and I think 
alike! We’re on the same wavelength.” It’s a fabulous feeling, almost 
like falling in love. 

Lovers call it “chemistry.” New friends talk of “instant rap¬ 
port,” and businesspeople say a “meeting of minds.” Yet it’s the 
same magic, that sudden sense of warmth and closeness, that 
strange sensation of “Wow, we were old friends at once!” 

When we were children, making friends was easier. Most of 
the kids we met grew up in the same town and so they were on our 
wavelength. Then the years went by. We grew older. We moved 
away. Our backgrounds, our experiences, our goals, our lifestyles 
became diverse. Thus, we fell off each other’s wavelengths. 

Wouldn’t it be great to have a magic surfboard to help you 
hop right back on everybody’s wavelength whenever you wanted? 
Here it is, a linguistic device that gets you riding on high rapport 
with everyone you meet. If you stand on a mountain cliff and 
shout “hello-oh” across the valley, your identical “hello-oh” thun¬ 
ders back at you. I call the technique “Echoing” because, like the 
mountain, you echo your conversation partner’s precise words. 


176 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Make Them Feel That You’re Like “ Family” 177 


It All Started Across the Ocean 

In many European countries, you’ll hear five, ten, or more lan¬ 
guages within the language. For example, in Italy, the Sicilians 
from the south speak a dialect that seems like gobbledygook to 
northern Italians. In an Italian restaurant, I once overheard a diner 
discover his waiter was also from Udine, a town in northeastern 
Italy where they speak the Friulano dialect. The diner stood up 
and hugged the waiter like he was a long-lost brother. They started 
babbling in a tongue that left the other Italian waiters shrugging. 

In America we have dialects, too. We just aren’t conscious of 
them. In fact we have thousands of different words, depending on 
our region, our job, our interests, and our upbringing. Once, when 
traveling across the country, I tried to order a soda like a Coke or 
7-Up in a highway diner. It took some explaining before the wait¬ 
ress understood I wanted what she called a “pop.” Perhaps because 
the English-speaking world is so large, Americans have a wider 
choice of words for the same old stuff than any language I’ve 
encountered. 

Family members find themselves speaking alike. Friends use 
the same words, and associates in a company or members in a club 
talk alike. Everyone you meet will have his or her own language 
that subliminally distinguishes them from outsiders. The words 
are all English, but they vary from area to area, industry to indus¬ 
try, and even family to family. 

The Linguistic Device That Says “We re 
on the Same Wavelength” 

When you want to give someone the subliminal feeling you’re just 
alike, use their words, not yours. Suppose you are selling a car to 
a young mother who tells you she is concerned about safety 
because she has a young “toddler.” When explaining the safety fea- 



1/8 How to Talk to Anyone 


tures of the car, use her word. Don’t use whatever word you call 
your kids. Don’t even say child-protection lock, which was in your 
sales manual. Tell your prospect, “No toddler can open the win¬ 
dow because of the driver’s control device.” Even call it a toddler- 
protection lock. When Mom hears toddler coming from your lips, 
she feels you are “family” because that’s how all her relatives refer 
to her little tyke. Suppose your prospect had said kid or infant. 
Fine, echo any word she used. (Well, almost any word. If she’d 
said my brat, you might want to pass on Echoing this time.) 


Echoing at Parties 

Let’s say you are at a party. It’s a huge bash with many different 
types of people. You are first chatting with a lawyer who tells you 
her profession is often maligned. When it comes your turn to speak, 
say profession too. If you say job, it puts a subconscious barrier 
between you. 

Next you meet a construction worker who starts talking about 
his job. Now you’re in trouble if you say, “Well, in my profession 
. . .” he’d think you were being hoity-toity. 

After the lawyer and the construction worker, you talk to sev¬ 
eral freelancers—first a model, then a professional speaker, finally 
a pop musician. All three of these folks will use different words for 
their work. The model brags about her bookings. The professional 
speaker might say bookings, but he is more apt to boast of his speak¬ 
ing engagements. A pop musician might say, “Yeah, man, I get a lot 
of gigs. ” It’s tough to memorize what they all call their work. Just 
keep your ears open and echo their word after they say it. 

Echoing goes beyond job names. For example if you are chat¬ 
ting with a boat owner and you call his boat an it, he labels you a 
real landlubber. (He reverently refers to his beloved boat, of 
course, as a she.) If you listen carefully, you hear language sub¬ 
tleties you never dreamed existed. Would you believe using the 
wrong synonym for a seemingly uncomplicated word like have 



Hoiu to Make Them Feel That You’re Like “Family” iyp 


labels you a know-nothing in somebody else’s world? For exam¬ 
ple, cat lovers purr about having cats. But horse people would say 
owning horses. And fish folk don’t own fish. They talk about keep¬ 
ing fish. Hey, no big deal. But if you use the wrong word, your 
conversation partner will assume, correctly, that you are a stranger 
in his or her hobbyland. 

The Peril of Not Echoing 

Sometimes you lose out by not Echoing. My friend Phil and I were 
talking with several guests at a party. One woman proudly told 
the group about the wonderful new ski chalet she had just pur¬ 
chased. She was looking forward to inviting her friends up to her 
little chalet in the mountains. 

“That’s wonderful,” said Phil, secretly hoping for an invita¬ 
tion. “Where exactly is your cabin?” KERPLUNK! There went 
Phil’s chances for an invitation to the lady’s chalet. 

I couldn’t resist. After the conversation, I whispered to my 
friend, “Phil, why did you insult that woman by calling her chalet 
a cabin?” Phil scratched his head and said, “What do you mean 
insult her? Cabin is a beautiful word. My family has a cabin in 
Cape Cod and I grew up loving the word, the associations, the joy 
of a cabin.” (In other words, the connotations of cabin.) Well, fine, 
Phil. The word cabin may be beautiful to you, but obviously the 
skier preferred the word chalet. 


Professional Echoing 

In today’s sales environment, customers expect salespeople to be 
problem solvers, not just vendors. They feel you don’t grasp their 
industry’s problems if you don’t speak their language. 

I have a friend, Penny, who sells office furniture. People in 
publishing, advertising, broadcasting, and a few lawyers are among 
her clients. Penny’s sales manual says office furniture. However, she 



180 How to Talk to Anyone 


told me, if she used the word office with all of her clients, they’d 
assume she knew nothing about their respective industries. 

She told me her client, the purchasing officer in advertising, 
talks about his advertising agency. Penny’s publishing client says 
publishing house. The lawyers talk about furniture for their firm, 
and her radio clients use the word station instead of office. “Hey,” 
Penny says, “it’s their salt mine. They can call it whatever the heck 
they please. And,” she added, “if I want to make the sale, I’d bet¬ 
ter call it the same thing.” 


4 * 


ECHNIQUE 


#45 


Echoing 


Echoing is a simple linguistic technique that packs a 
powerful wallop. Listen to the speaker’s arbitrary choice 
of nouns, verbs, prepositions, adjectives—and echo 
them back. Hearing their words come out of your 
mouth creates subliminal rapport. It makes them feel 
you share their values, their attitudes, their interests, 
their experiences. 


Echoing Is Politically Correct Insurance 

Here’s a quiz: You’re talking with a pharmacist and you ask her, 
“How long have you worked at the drugstore?” What’s wrong with 
that question? 

Give up? It’s the word drugstore. Pharmacists abhor the word 
because it conjures up many industry problems. They’re used to 
hearing it from outsiders, but it’s a tip-off that they are unaware 
of, or insensitive to, their professional problems. They prefer 
pharmacy. 



How to Make Them Feel That You’re Like “Family” 181 


Recently, at a reception, I introduced one of my friends, 
Susan, as a day-care worker. Afterward Susan begged, “Led, pul- 
eeze do not call me a day-care worker. Were child-care workers 
Whoops! Time and recent history quickly make certain terms 
archaic. 

A group’s intense preference for one word is not arbitrary. Cer¬ 
tain jobs, minorities, and special-interest groups often have a his¬ 
tory the public is not sensitive to. When that history has too much 
pain attached to it, people invent another word that doesn’t have 
bitter connotations. 

I have a dear friend, Leslie, who is in a wheelchair. She says 
whenever anyone says the word handicapped, she cringes. Leslie 
says it makes her feel less than whole. “We prefer you say person 
with a disability .” She then gave a moving explanation. “We peo¬ 
ple with disabilities are the same as every other able-bodied per¬ 
son. We say AB,” she added. “ABs go through life with all the same 
baggage we do. We just carry one extra piece, a disability.” 

It’s simple. It’s effective. To show respect and make people feel 
close to you, Echo their words. It makes you a more sensitive com¬ 
municator—and keeps you out of trouble every time. 



46 How to My Make It 
Gear to Them 


I recently had to make a presentation to fifteen men in a corpo¬ 
rate meeting. “OK,” I said to myself as I stood up, “fifteen Mar¬ 
tians and one Venusian.” No problem! I’d readMen Are from Mars, 
Women Are from Venus. I’d explored neurological differences in 
men’s and women’s brains. I knew all about gender-specific body- 
language signals. Hey, I teach communications differences. I was 
well prepared to talk to these men, get my point across, and fend 
any questions. 

Everything started out fine. I’d conceived my presentation 
clearly and concisely, developed each theme, and presented it flaw¬ 
lessly. Then, I sat down and confidently invited questions and open 
discussion. 

That’s when it fell apart. All I remember is a horrifying bar¬ 
rage of questions couched in football analogies. 

“Do you think we dropped the ball on that one?” one man 
asked. 

“Yeah,” another responded. “But can we make a fumble 
recovery?” 

Those two I understood. However, when it got to pass cov¬ 
erage and intentional grounding, I started to lose it. When one 


182 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Really Make It Clear to Them 183 


guy raved about a Hail Mary pass being needed to save the deal, 
I suffered the ultimate humiliation. I had to ask, “Uh, what does 
that mean?” The guys looked at each other knowingly and then 
smiled condescendingly as they explained it to me. 

That night I had sadistic fantasies of fifteen women running 
the company and one man left scratching his head as we bandied 
about childbirth analogies. 

“We won’t get his new proposal til the third trimester,” 
reports the account exec. 

“Yeah, but that’s six months away. Let’s get it by C-section,” 
responds the comptroller. 

“Why bother?” asks the marketing VP. “All his ideas are devel¬ 
oped in vitro anyway.” 

“I’m about to go into postpartum depression,” murmurs the 
CEO. The lone male employee is left as confused and humiliated 
as I was in the face of football analogies. 

Ahem, the aim of this book is not to feed fiendish fantasies, 
but to improve communications. To that end, I offer the follow¬ 
ing technique based on analogies, not just football analogies. 
Because old-boy analogies are unsportsman-like conduct with the 
girls. 


On-Target Analogies Hit Bull’s-Eye 

Analogies can be an effective communications tool—if you evoke 
images from the life of the person you are talking to. Men don’t 
use football analogies to obfuscate matters or to confuse women 
but to clarify situations for each other. Analogies from the sport 
bring situations to life for men because generally they watch more 
football than women. 

Moving on to other sports analogies: everyone knows what 
the speaker means when he or she hears, “We’ll never strike out 



184 How to Talk to Anyone 


with this solution.” Nevertheless, the image would be more com¬ 
pelling to a baseball fan as would analogies like “caught on the fly,” 
“hitting the dirt,” “or throwing a spit ball.” 

You’ve heard people say, “This solution is right on target.” We 
all understand it. But the phrasing would be more dramatic for 
archery enthusiasts. If your listener were a bowler, speaking of 
“gutter balls” or “big splits” would bring whatever you were dis¬ 
cussing to life. If your business buddies were basketball fans, 
analogies like “hook shot” or “air ball” would land right in their 
basket. If your client wrestles, saying “feints” and “scissor holds” 
would be the way to grab him. 

These analogies might sound far-fetched to you. But they are 
potent communications tools when they evoke your conversation 
partners world. Why not use the most powerful terms possible to 
get your point across and make the sale? I call the technique 
“Potent Imaging.” 




ECHNIQUE 


#46 


Potent Imaging 


Does your customer have a garden? Talk about “sowing 
the seeds for success.” Does your boss own a boat? Tell 
him or her about a concept that will “hold water” or 
“stay afloat.” Maybe he is a private pilot? Talk about a 
concept really “taking off.” She plays tennis? Tell her it 
really hits the “sweet spot.” 

Evoke your listener’s interests or lifestyle and weave 
images around it. To give your points more power and 
punch, use analogies from your listener’s world, not 
your own. Potent Imaging also tells your listeners you 
think like them and hints you share their interests. 



How to Really Make It Clear to Them 185 


Pardon me while I return momentarily to my sadistic fantasies 
of the hopelessly confused lone male employee. The all-female 
management team is now arguing the corporate strategy using, 
not football of course, but ballet analogies. 

“I say let’s do the corporate takeover allegro,” she suggests. 

“Nah, you gotta go adagio in these matters,” her colleague 
responds. 

“But what if they do a tour jete while were poised in fifth?” 

“C’mon did you ever see a good pas seul from their president?” 

The top woman settles it. “I say let’s just give him a little 
reverence, and then a grand battement in the balls.” 



47 How to Make Them 
Feel You Empathize 
(Without Just Saying 
“Yep, Uh Huh, Yeah”) 

While listening to someone talk, we often vocalize “uh huh” or 
purr throaty little “umm” sounds to reassure the speaker we have 
heard their words. In fact, with some it’s such a habit, the noises 
escape their throats unconsciously. My friend Phil is a consum¬ 
mate, constant, and incontinent “ummer” whenever I’m talking. 
Occasionally, if I’m feeling contentious after he’s given one of his 
agreeable “umms” in response to something I’ve said, I challenge 
him with, “OK, Phil, what did I say?” 

“Uh, well, gosh ...” Phil has no idea. It’s not his fault. He’s 
male. Men are especially guilty of the not-really-listening umm 
habit. Once, when I was on a monologue about nothing in par¬ 
ticular, Phil was on a real umm roll. To test his listening skills, I 
slipped in, “Yes, this afternoon I think I’ll go out and get tattooed 
all over my body.” 

Phil nodded his habitual “uh huh.” 

Well, umming is better than a blank stare. However, it’s not 
the choice of top communicators. Try replacing your umms with 
full-blown empathizers. 


186 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Make Them Feel You Empathize i8y 


What Are Empathizers? 

Empathizers are simple, short, supportive statements. Unlike “uh 
huh,” they are complete sentences such as “I can appreciate you 
decided to do that,” or “That really is exciting.” Empathizers can 
be one-sentence positive critiques like “Yes, that was the honor¬ 
able thing to do,” or “It’s charming you felt that way.” 

When you respond with complete sentences instead of the 
usual grunts, not only do you come across as more articulate, but 
your listener feels that you really understand. 


Zb 


ECHNIQUE #47 

Employ Empathizers 


Don’t be an unconscious ummer. Vocalize complete 
sentences to show your understanding. Dust your 
dialogue with phrases like “I see what you mean.” 
Sprinkle it with sentimental sparklers like “That’s a 
lovely thing to say.” Your empathy impresses your 
listeners and encourages them to continue. 


Of course, you pay a price. To use the right empathizers, you 
do need to listen. 

Now let’s fine-tune this technique and explore advanced 
empathizing. 



48 How to Make Them Think 
You See/Hear/Feel It 
Just the Way They Do 


About ten years ago, I had a roommate named Brenda. Brenda 
was a tap dance teacher who didn’t just tap dance to make a liv¬ 
ing. She lived to tap. Posters of Bill “Bojangles” Robinson and 
Charles “Honi” Coles plastered her walls. She didn’t walk around 
the house. She tapped her way from room to room. It was noisy, 
but at least, when a phone call came for Brenda, I never had trou¬ 
ble finding her. 

Once I asked Brenda when she got interested in tap. She said, 
“From the moment I first opened my ears.” Her ears? I thought, 
that’s strange. Most people say “from the moment I opened my 
eyes.” At that moment, I realized Brenda “saw” the world more 
through her ears than her eyes. 

We all perceive the world through five senses. We see the 
world. We hear the world. We feel the world. We smell the world. 
And we taste the world. Therefore, we talk in terms of those five 
senses. Proponents of neurolinguistic programming (NLP) tell us, 
for each person, one sense is stronger than others. For Brenda, it 
was her hearing. 

Brenda told me she grew up in a dark apartment below street 
level in New York City. She remembers, as an infant, hearing the 
pitter-patter of feet walking just above her crib on the sidewalk. 


188 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Make Them Think You See/Hear/Feel It Just the Way They Do i8p 


As a toddler, her tiny ears were bombarded with honking horns, 
shrieking sirens, and tire chains slapping the icy streets. She espe¬ 
cially remembers the clumpety-clomp of police horses’ hoofs on 
the pavement outside her window. Her first perceptions of the out¬ 
side world came to her through her ears. To this day, sound dom¬ 
inates her life. Brenda, the tap dancer, is an auditory person. 

Since neurolinguists suggest invoking our listener’s strongest 
sense, I tried a few auditory references on Brenda. Rather than 
saying, “That looks good to me,” I’d say “That sounds good.” 
Instead of saying, “I see what you mean,” I’d say, “I hear you.” 
When I used these auditory references, I felt she paid more 
attention. 

So I started listening very carefully to all my friends to dis¬ 
cover which was their primary perception. Sometimes I’d hear 
visual references like 

“I see what you mean.” 

“That looks good to me.” 

“I can’t picture myself doing that.” 

“I take a dim view of that idea.” 

“From my perspective . . .” 

Wow, I thought I was really on to something! 


A Wrinkle Develops 

But then, whoops, at other times, I’d hear that same friend say 
“Yeah, I hear you.” 

“Sure, that sounds good to me.” 

“I kept saying to myself it would work.” 



ipo How to Talk to Anyone 


“That has a negative ring to it.” 

“He really tuned out on the whole idea.” 

“Something tells me . . .” 

This wasn’t going to be quite as easy as I’d expected. However, 
I wasn’t ready to give up. 

Once, Brenda and I went skiing with several friends. That 
night we were at a party. One of our friends was telling a group 
of people, “The ski slopes were beautiful. Everything was so crys¬ 
tal clear and white.” 

“A visual person?” I asked myself. 

Another skier added, “The feel of the fresh snow on our faces 
was terrific.” 

“Aha, a kinesthetic person,” I mused silently. 

Sure enough, just then, Brenda said, “Today was so silent. The 
only sound you could hear was the wind in your ears as you came 
swooshing down the slopes.” That little riff convinced me there 
was something to it. 

However, I still found it difficult to discern one’s primary 
sense. 

A Simple Solution 

Here’s what I’ve found does work, and it doesn’t take too much 
detective work on your part. I call the technique “Anatomically 
Correct Empathizers,” and it’s easy to master. Unless it is obvious 
the person you are speaking with is primarily visual, auditory, or 
kinesthetic, simply respond in his or her mode of the moment. 
Match your empathizers to the current sense someone is talking 
through. For example, suppose a business colleague describing a 
financial plan says, “With this plan, we can see our way clear in 
six months.” Since this time she’s using primarily visual references, 



How to Make Them Think You See/Hear/Feel It Just the Way They Do ipi 


say “I see what you mean” or “You really have a clear picture of 
that situation.” 

If, instead, your colleague had said, “This plan has a good ring 
to it,” you’d substitute auditory empathizers like “It does sound 
great,” or “I hear you.” 

A third possibility. Suppose she had said, “I have a gut feeling 
this plan will work.” Now you give her a kinesthetic empathizer 
like “I can understand how you feel,” or “You have a good grasp 
of that problem.” 


Zb 


ECHNIQUE 


#48 


Anatomically Correct Empathizers 


What part of their anatomy are your associates talking 
through? Their eyes? Their ears? Their gut? 

For visual people, use visual empathizers to make 
them think you see the world the way they do. For 
auditory folks, use auditory empathizers to make them 
think you hear them loud and clear. For kinesthetic 
types, use kinesthetic empathizers to make them think 
you feel the same way they do. 


What about the other two senses, taste and smell? Well, I’ve 
never run up against any gustatory or olfactory types. But you 
could always compliment a chef by saying, “That’s a delicious 
idea.” And if you are talking to your dog (olfactory, of course), 
tell him “The whole idea stinks.” 

The next technique helps create affinity with a single word. 



49 How to Make’Em 
Think We (Instead of 
You vs. Me) 


By just eavesdropping for a few moments on any two people chat¬ 
ting, you could tell a lot about their relationship. You could tell if 
they were new acquaintances or old friends. You could tell whether 
a man and a woman were strangers or a couple. 

You wouldn’t even need to hear friends call each other “pal,” 
“buddy,” or “mate.” You wouldn’t need to hear a man and a 
woman whisper “dear,” “sweetheart,” or “turtle dove.” It wouldn’t 
matter what they were discussing or even their tone of voice. You 
could even be blindfolded and tell a lot about their relationship 
because the technique I’m about to share has nothing to do with 
body language. 

How? A fascinating progression of conversation unfolds as 
people become closer. Here’s how it develops: 

Level One: Cliches 

Two strangers talking together primarily toss cliches back and 
forth. For instance, when chatting about the universally agreed- 
upon world’s dullest subject—the weather—one stranger might 
say to the other, “Beautiful sunny weather we’ve been having.” Or, 
“Boy, some rain, huh?” That’s level one, cliches. 


Ip2 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Make 'Em Think We (Instead of You vs. Me) 193 


Level Two: Facts 

People who know each other but are just acquaintances often dis¬ 
cuss facts. “You know, Joe, we’ve had twice as many sunny days 
this year to date as last.” Or, “Yeah, well, we finally decided to put 
in a swimming pool to beat the heat.” 

Level Three: Feelings and 
Personal Questions 

When people become friends, they often express their feelings to 
each other, even on subjects as dull as the weather. “George, I just 
love these sunny days.” They also ask each other personal ques¬ 
tions: “How about you, Betty? Are you a sun person?” 

Level Four: We Statements 

Now we progress to the highest level of intimacy. This level is 
richer than facts and creates more rapport than feelings. It’s use 
and us statements. Friends discussing the weather might say, “If 
we keep having this good weather, it’ll be a great summer.” Lovers 
might say, “I hope this good weather keeps up for us so we can go 
swimming on our trip.” 

A technique to achieve the ultimate verbal intimacy grows out 
of this phenomenon. Simply use the word we prematurely. You can 
use it to make a client, a prospect, a stranger feel you are already 
friends. Use it to make a potential romantic partner feel the two 
of you are already an item. I call it the “Premature We.” In casual 
conversation, simply cut through levels one and two. Jump straight 
to three and four. 

Ask your prospect’s feelings on something the way you would 
query a friend. (“George, how do you feel about the new gover¬ 
nor?”) Then use the pronoun we when discussing anything that 
might affect the two of you. (“Do you think were going to pros- 



ip 4 How to Talk to Anyone 


per during his administration?”) Make it a point to concoct we 
sentences, the kind people instinctively reserve for friends, lovers, 
and other intimates. (“I think we’ll survive while the governor’s in 
office.”) 

The word we fosters togetherness. It makes the listener feel 
connected. It gives a subliminal feeling of “you and me against the 
cold, cold world.” When you prematurely say we or us, even to 
strangers, it subconsciously brings them closer. It subliminally hints 
you are already friends. At a party, you might say to someone 
standing behind you at the buffet line, “Hey, this looks great. They 
really laid out a nice spread for us." Or, “Uh-oh, were going to get 
fat if we let ourselves enjoy all of this.” 




ECHNIQUE #49 

The Premature We 


Create the sensation of intimacy with someone even if 
you’ve met just moments before. Scramble the signals 
in their psyche by skipping conversational levels one 
and two and cutting right to levels three and four. 
Elicit intimate feelings by using the magic words we, 
us, and our. 


Well, we have just explored how to copy our conversation 
partners’ movements with Be a Copyclass, echo their words, evoke 
Potent Images from their world, create a bond through their pri¬ 
mary sense with Anatomically Correct Empathizers, and establish 
subliminal friendship with words like we. 

What else do friends, lovers, and close associates have in com¬ 
mon? A history. The final technique in this section is a device to 
give a fairly new acquaintance the warm and fuzzy feeling the two 
of you have been together for a long, long time. 



s&lt;y How to Create a 
Friendly “Private Joke” 
with Them 


Lovers whisper phrases in each others’ ears that mean nothing to 
anyone but themselves. Friends crack up over a few words that 
sound like gobbledygook to anyone overhearing them. Close busi¬ 
ness associates chuckle about shared experiences. 

One company I’ve worked with has seen reengineering, 
empowerment, TQM, and team building come and go in one 
decade. At company parties, the employees never fail to crack up 
over the time when the whole company—managers to mail-room 
clerks—scrambled up a twenty-nine-foot pole together all in the 
name of team building. The CEO slipped down the pole and 
broke his big toe. At the next weekly meeting, the CEO shook his 
crutch and caustically announced, “No more team exercises!” 
Thus, the death of team building—and the birth of a private joke. 

Out of shared experiences like this, a company culture grows. 
These employees have a history and a language to go with it. To 
this day, whenever they want to put an abrupt end to any idea, 
they say, “Let’s shake a crutch at it” or “Let’s slide that one down 
the flagpole.” They all smile. Nobody knows what they mean 
except fellow employees. 

The playwright Neil Simon, sometimes with a single word, 
can make an entire Broadway audience understand two perform- 


m 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



ip 6 How to Talk to Anyone 


ers onstage are either married or longtime friends. The actor sim¬ 
ply says something to the actress that makes no sense to the audi¬ 
ence. Then both of them laugh uproariously. Everybody gets the 
message: these two people are an item. 

Every time my friend Daryl and I meet, we don’t say “Hello.” 
We say “Quack.” Why? We met at a party five years ago and, in 
our first conversation, Daryl told me he grew up on a duck farm. 
When I told him I’d never seen a duck farm, he performed the 
best human imitation of a duck I’d ever seen. He flipped his head 
side to side looking at me first out of one eye, then the other, all 
the while flapping his arms and quacking. I got such a laugh out 
of his performance that it inspired him to do a full flat-footed duck 
waddle for me. It was contagious. Together we waddled around 
the room flapping and quacking. We made absolute fools of our¬ 
selves that evening. 


4 * 


ECHNIQUE 


#50 


Instant History 


When you meet a stranger you’d like to make less a 
stranger, search for some special moment you shared 
during your first encounter. Then find a few words that 
reprieve the laugh, the warm smile, the good feelings 
the two of you felt. Now, just like old friends, you have 
a history together, an Instant History. 

With anyone you’d like to make part of your 
personal or professional future, look for special 
moments together. Then make them a refrain. 


The next day, my phone rang. I picked up the receiver to hear, 
not “Hello, this is Daryl,” but simply, “Quack.” I’m sure that’s 



How to Create a Friendly “Private Joke” with Them ipy 


what started our friendship. To this day, every time I hear his 
“Quack” on the phone, it floods me with happy, if a tad embar¬ 
rassing, memories. It recalls our history and renews our friendship 
no matter how long it’s been since we last quacked at each other. 

Now What’s Left? 

Chemistry, charisma, and confidence are three characteristics 
shared by big winners in all walks of life. Part One helped us make 
a dynamic, confident, and charismatic first impression with body 
language. In Part Two, we put smooth small-talk lyrics to our body 
ballet. Then in Part Three, we seized hints from the big boys and 
big girls so were contenders for life’s big league. Part Four rescued 
us from being tongue-tied with folks with whom we have very lit¬ 
tle in common. And in Part Five, we learned techniques to create 
instant chemistry, instant intimacy, instant rapport. 

What’s left? You guessed it—making people feel really good 
about themselves. But compliments are a dangerous weapon in 
today’s world. One mishandling and you can butcher the rela¬ 
tionship. Let us now explore the power of praise, the folly of flat¬ 
tery, and how you can use these potent tools effectively. 



This page intentionally left blank. 



PART SIX 

How to Differentiate 
the Power of Praise 
from the Folly of 
Flattery 

Kids are experts at getting what they want. Perched on Papas knee, 
“Oh Daddy, you’re so wunnerful. I know you’ll buy me that new 
doll.” The next morning, with Mama in the supermarket, “Oh 
Mommy, I love you. You’re the most bestest mommy in the world. 
I know you’ll buy me that chocolate munchie.” 

From the hungry infant’s instinctive cooing as Mommy 
approaches the crib to the car salesman’s calculated praise as the 
prospect walks into the showroom, compliments come naturally 
to people when they want something from somebody. In fact, 
compliments are the most widely used and thoroughly endorsed 
of all getting-what-you-want techniques. When Dale Carnegie 
wrote “Begin with praise,” fifteen million readers took it to heart. 
Most of us still think praise is the path to extracting what we want 
from someone. 

And yes, if it’s as simple as dolls from daddy and munchies 
from mommy, it may be. But the business world has changed 

199 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



200 How to Talk to Anyone 


dramatically since Dale Carnegie’s day. In today’s world, not every 
smiling flatterer has the power to procure through praise. 


The Malaise of Unskilled Praise 

You give someone a compliment. You smile, waiting to see the 
warm feelings engulf the recipient. You may have to wait a long 
time. 

If he or she has a speck of suspicion your praise is self-serving, 
it has the opposite effect. If your compliment is insincere or 
unskilled, it can wreck your chances of ever being trusted by that 
person again. It can abort a potential relationship before it ever gets 
off the runway. 

However, skilled praise is a different story. When done well, 
it gives the relationship immediate liftoff. It can make a sale, win 
a new friend, or rejuvenate a marriage on a golden anniversary. 

What is the difference between praise that lifts and flattery 
that flattens? Many factors enter the equation. They include your 
sincerity, timing, motivation, and wording. They also involve the 
recipient’s self-image, professional position, experience with com¬ 
pliments, and judgment of your powers of perception. Of course 
it entails the relationship between the two of you and how long 
you have known each other. If you’re complimenting someone 
by phone, E-mail, or snail mail, it even involves subtleties such 
as whether you’ve ever seen his or face, either in person or a 
photograph. 

Mind boggling, isn’t it? Sociologists’ research shows: 1) a com¬ 
pliment from a new person is more potent than from someone you 
already know, 2) your compliment has more credibility when given 
to an unattractive person or an attractive person whose face you’ve 
never seen, 3) you are taken more seriously if you preface your 
comments by some self-effacing remark—but only if your listener 
perceives you as higher on the totem pole. If you’re lower, your 



How to Differentiate the Power of Praise from the Folly of Flattery 201 


self-effacing remark reduces your credibility. Complicated, this 
complimenting stuff. 

Rather than dizzying ourselves with the surfeit of specific 
studies, let’s just put some terrific techniques in our little bag of 
tricks. Each of the following meets all the criteria of social scien¬ 
tists’ findings. Here are nine effective ways to praise in the new 
millennium. 



si How to Compliment 
Someone (Without 
Sounding Like You’re 
Brownnosing) 

The risk in giving a compliment face-to-face is, of course, that the 
distrustful recipient will assume you are indulging in shameless, 
obsequious pandering to achieve your own greedy goals. 

It’s a sad reality about compliments. If you lay a big one out 
of the blue on your boss, your prospect, or your sweetie, the recip¬ 
ient will probably think you’re brownnosing. Your main squeeze 
will assume you’re suffering guilt over something you’ve done. So 
what’s the solution? Hold back your sincere esteem? 

No, simply deliver it through the grapevine. The grapevine 
has long been a trusted means of communication. From the days 
when Catskills comics insisted the best ways to spread news were 
“telephone, telegraph, and tell-a-woman,” we have known it works. 
Unfortunately the grapevine is most often associated with bad 
news, the kind that goes in one ear and over the back fence. But 
the grapevine need not be laden only with scuttlebutt and sour 
grapes. Good news can travel through the same filament. And 
when it arrives in the recipient’s ear, it is all the more delectable. 
This is not a new discovery. Back in 1732, Thomas Fuller wrote, 
“He’s my friend that speaks well of me behind my back.” We’re 

202 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Compliment Someone (Without Sounding Like You’re Brownnosing) 203 


more apt to trust someone who says nice things about us when we 
aren’t listening than someone who flatters us to our face. 


No-Risk Praise (Do It Behind Their Back) 

Instead of telling someone directly of your admiration, tell some¬ 
one who is close to the person you wish to compliment. For 
instance, suppose you want to be in the good graces of Jane Smith. 
Don’t directly compliment Jane. Go to her close associate Diane 
Doe and say, “You know, Jane is a very dynamic woman. She said 
something so brilliant in the meeting the other day. Someday she’ll 
be running this company.” I place ten-to-one odds your comment 
will get back to Jane via the grapevine in twenty-four hours. Diane 
will tell her friend, “You should hear what so ’n’ so said about you 
the other day.” 


4 * 


ECHNIQUE #51 

Grapevine Glory 


A compliment one hears is never as exciting as the one 
he overhears. A priceless way to praise is not by 
telephone, not by telegraph, but by tell-a-friend. This 
way you escape possible suspicion that you are an 
apple-polishing, bootlicking, egg-sucking, back- 
scratching sycophant trying to win brownie points. You 
also leave recipients with the happy fantasy that you are 
telling the whole world about their greatness. 


When you gave Grapevine Glory to Jane, Diane became the 
carrier pigeon of that compliment. Which leads us to the next 
technique where you become the carrier pigeon of other people’s 
compliments. 



How to Bea 
“Carrier Pigeon” of 
Good Feelings 


Carrier pigeons have a long and valiant history. The dauntless 
winged messengers, often maimed by shellfire and dying after 
delivering their messages, have saved the lives of thousands. One 
tenacious little bird named Cher Ami is credited with saving two 
hundred lives during the Battle of the Argonne in World War I. 
The brave one-legged little birdie, one of his wings shot through, 
carried a message dangling from his remaining ligament. The 
blood-smeared little ball of feathers arrived just in time to warn 
that the Germans were about to bomb the city. 

Stumpy Joe, another plucky pigeon, had such a heroic battle- 
scarred career that his fans stuffed him, mounted him, and put 
him on display in the National Air Force Museum in Dayton, 
Ohio. And millions of other brave birds have brought joyful mes¬ 
sages to racing-pigeon enthusiasts around the world. In that fine 
tradition, I present the complimenting technique I call “Carrier 
Pigeon Kudos.” 

Whenever you hear a laudatory comment about someone, 
don’t let it end there. You don’t need to write it, roll it up in a cap¬ 
sule, strap it to your leg like Stumpy Joe, and fly it to the recipi¬ 
ent. Nevertheless, you can remember the kudo and verbally carry 
it to the person who will get the most pleasure—the person who 
was complimented. 


204 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Be a “Carrier Pigeon” of Good Feelings 205 


Keep your ears open for good things people say about each 
other. If your colleague Carl says something nice about another 
colleague, Sam, pass it on. “You know, Sam, Carl said the nicest 
thing about you the other day.” 

Your sister tells you your first cousin is a dynamite relative. Go 
ahead and call Cuz’. 

Your mother tells you she thinks Manny did a great job mow¬ 
ing the lawn. Pass it on to him. Hey, we all like a little apprecia¬ 
tion, even from Mom. 

Here’s where it benefits you. Everyone loves the bearer of glad 
tidings. When you bring someone third-party kudos, they appre¬ 
ciate you as much as the complimenter. Call it gossip if you like. 
This is the good kind. 


1 % 


ECHNIQUE #52 

Carrier Pigeon Kudos 


People immediately grow a beak and metamorphosize 
themselves into carrier pigeons when there’s bad news. 
(It’s called gossip.) Instead, become a carrier of good 
news and kudos. Whenever you hear something 
complimentary about someone, fly to them with the 
compliment. Your fans may not posthumously stuff 
you and put you on display in a museum like Stumpy 
Joe. But everyone loves the carrier pigeon of kind 
thoughts. 


Carry More Cargo than Compliments 

Another way to warm hearts and win friends is to become a car¬ 
rier pigeon of news items that might interest the recipient. Call, 
mail, or E-mail people with information they might find interest- 



206 How to Talk to Anyone 


ing. If your friend Ned is a furniture designer in North Carolina 
and you see a big article in the Los Angeles Times about furniture 
trends, fax it to him. If your client Sally is a sculptor in Seattle and 
you see her work in someone’s home in New York, send her a note. 

My friend Dan lives in San Francisco, and whenever he runs 
across anything in the paper on communications, he clips it and 
sends it to me. No note, just “FYI—Regards, Dan” in the corner. 
He’s like my own private West Coast clipping service. 

Try it. Think of the money you’ll save on greeting cards. A 
relevant clipping is the big winner’s way of saying, “I’m thinking 
of you and your interests.” 



55 How to Make’Em Feel 
Your Admiration “Just 
Slipped Out” 


Here’s yet another caress for someone’s ego. Don’t give a blatant 
compliment. Merely imply something magnificent about your con¬ 
versation partner. Several months ago, I was visiting an old friend 
in Denver whom I hadn’t seen in a long time. When he came to 
my hotel to pick me up, he said, “Hello, Leil, how are you?” Then 
he paused, looked at me, and said, “You’ve obviously been well.” 
Wow, I felt terrific. He implied I looked good and that made my 
evening. 

Guess the Good Lord decided I shouldn’t have too swollen a 
head, however, because later that evening, after my friend dropped 
me off, I got into the hotel elevator. A maintenance man entered 
at the third floor. He smiled at me. I smiled back. He looked at 
me again and said, “Gosh, ma’am, was you a model? [Oh, man, 
was I feeling on top of the world now!] . . . when you was young?” 
he continued. 

CRASH! Why couldn’t he have zipped his lip before the 
zinger? I loved the implication in the first part of his comment. 
But the second implied I was now an old lady. Ruined my next 
day. Heck, his unintentional low blow ruined my week. In fact I 
still feel wretched about it. 


207 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



208 How to Talk to Anyone 


You have to be careful of unintentional bad implications. If, 
visiting a new city, you stop someone on the street and say, “Excuse 
me, could you tell me if there are any fine dining restaurants 
nearby?” you are implying the passerby is a person of taste. If, 
however, you ask that same passerby, “Hey, know any down and 
dirty bars in this burg?” your implication is entirely different. Find 
a way to imply magnificent qualities of those you wish to indi¬ 
rectly compliment. 




ECHNIQUE #53 

Implied Magnificence 


Throw a few comments into your conversation that 
presuppose something positive about the person you’re 
talking with. But be careful. Don’t blow it like the well- 
intentioned maintenance man. Or the southern boy 
who, at the prom, thought he was flattering his date 
when he told her, “Gosh, Mary Lou, for a fat gal you 
dance real good.” 



54 How to Win Their 
Hearts by Being an 
“Undercover 
Complimenter” 


Next in our agglomeration of joy spreaders is a technique I call 
“Accidental Adulation.” Once, at a small dinner party, the subject 
turned to space travel. The gentleman seated to my right said, 
“Led, you’re much too young to remember this, but when Apollo 
n landed on the moon ...” 

If my life depended on it, I couldn’t tell you what the chap 
said next. I simply remember smiling to myself and stretching to 
get a glimpse of my youthful self in the dining-room mirror. Of 
course I remember July 1969. Like the rest of the world, I was 
glued to the television watching Neil Armstrong’s size 9 Vi B boot 
hit the moon. However, I certainly was not thinking of moon 
travel at that dinner party. I was too busy reveling in the fact that 
this lovely man didn’t think I was old enough to remember 1969. 
I assumed his opinion of my youthfulness just slipped out. There¬ 
fore it must be sincere. 

Sure! Now that I think about it, he probably knew darn well 
I was old enough to remember the moon landing. I bet he was 


209 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



2io How to Talk to Anyone 


using the maneuver Accidental Adulation. But it doesn’t matter. 
My warm memories of him remain. Accidental Adulation is slip¬ 
ping praise into the secondary part of your point, putting it in ver¬ 
bal parentheses. 


Try It. You’ll Like It. They’ll Love It. 

Try Accidental Adulation and see smiles break out on the faces of 
the recipients. Tell your sixty-five-year-old uncle, “Anyone as fit 
as you would have zipped right up those steps, but boy, was I out 
of breath.” Tell a colleague: “Because you’re so knowledgeable in 
contract law, you would have read between the lines, but stupidly, 
I signed it.” 

You run the danger, of course, that you will please the recip¬ 
ient so profoundly with your parenthetical praise, he or she won’t 
hear your main point. 


Zb 


ECHNIQUE #54 

Accidental Adulation 


Become an undercover complimenter. Stealthily sneak 
praise into the parenthetical part of your sentence. 

Just don’t try to quiz anyone later on your main 
point. The joyful jolt of your accidental adulation 
strikes them temporarily deaf to anything that follows. 


So far we have explored four covert compliments: Grapevine 
Glory, Carrier Pigeon Kudos, Implied Magnificence, and Acci¬ 
dental Adulation. There are times, of course, when blatant praise 
does work. The next techniques will hone your skills in this pre¬ 
carious but rewarding venture. 



55 How to Make’Em Never 
Forget You with a 
“killer Compliment” 


Would you like to have a little trick up your sleeve potent enough 
to kick start commerce, ignite a friendship or even a love affair? 
I’ll give you one, but only if you heed its warning label. You must 
register your tongue as a lethal weapon once you’ve mastered the 
following technique. It’s called the “Killer Compliment.” 

It was born one night some years ago after my then-roommate, 
Christine, and I had just returned home from a holiday party. As 
we were taking off our coats, she had a silly smile on her face and 
a faraway look in her eye. 

“Christine, are you OK?” I asked. 

“Oh yes,” she purred. “I’m going to go out with that man.” 

“Man? What man?” 

“Oh, you know,” she said, chastising me for not knowing, “the 
one who told me I had beautiful teeth.” 

Teeth! 

That night I happened to walk by the bathroom door as 
Christine was getting ready for bed. I saw her grinning at herself 
in the mirror, tilting her head from side to side, and brushing each 
individual tooth. All the while she kept her eyes glued to the mir¬ 
ror, inspecting each one for the beauty her new admirer com¬ 
mented on. I realized the fellow who had given Christine the 

211 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



2i2 How to Talk to Anyone 


unusual compliment had made her day—and had made a killer 
impression on her. Thus the Killer Compliment came into being. 

What is the Killer Compliment? It is commenting on some 
very personal and specific quality you spot in someone. A Killer 
Compliment is not “I like your tie” or “You’re a very nice person.” 
(The first is not personal enough and the second is not specific 
enough.) A Killer Compliment is more like “What exquisite eyes 
you have,” (very specific) or “You have a wonderful air of honesty 
about you,” (very personal). 

Because delivering your first Killer Compliment is difficult, I 
trick my seminar participants into pulling it off. About midway 
through the program, I’ll ask them to close their eyes and think 
about a partner they had in an earlier exercise. Then I say, “Now 
recall one attractive physical quality or personality trait you 
observed in your partner. Not one you would necessarily comment 
on,” I caution. “Perhaps your partner had a lovely smile or a twin¬ 
kle in her eye. Perhaps he exuded a sense of calm or credibility. 
Got it in your mind?” 

Then the thunderbolt: “OK, now go find your partner and 
tell them the nice quality you noticed.” “What? Tell them?” The 
thought paralyzes them. One by one, however, they courageously 
seek their partners and deliver their Killer Compliments. As peo¬ 
ple hear a stranger tell them they have beautiful hands or pene¬ 
trating brown eyes, joy fills the room. Laughter explodes in every 
corner. I am now looking out at a sea of smiles and happy blushes. 
Everyone loves receiving his or her personal Killer Compliment. 
And everyone develops friendly feelings toward the giver. 

The Killer Compliment User’s Manual 

Just like a cannon, if you don’t use the Killer Compliment cor¬ 
rectly, it can backfire. Here’s the user’s manual that comes with 
the mighty missile. 



How to Make ’Em Never Forget You with a “Killer Compliment” 213 


&amp; 


ECHNIQUE #55 

Killer Compliment 


Whenever you are talking with a stranger you’d like to 
make part of your professional or personal future, search 
for one attractive, specific, and unique quality he or she 
has. 

At the end of the conversation, look the individual 
right in the eye. Say his or her name and proceed to 
curl all ten toes with the Killer Compliment. 


Rule #1: Deliver your Killer Compliment to the recipi¬ 
ent in private. If you are standing with a group of four or five 
people and you praise one woman for being fit, every other woman 
feels like a barrel of lard. If you tell one man he has wonderful 
carriage, every other feels like a hunchback. You also make the 
blushing recipient uncomfortable. 

Rule #2: Make your Killer Compliment credible. For 
example, I’m tone-deaf. If I’m forced to sing even a simple song 
like “Happy Birthday,” I sound like a sick pig. If anyone in earshot 
were foolish enough to tell me they liked my voice, I’d know it 
was hogwash. 

Rule #3: Confer only one Killer Compliment per half 
year on each recipient. Otherwise you come across as insincere, 
groveling, obsequious, pandering, and a thoroughly manipulative 
person. Not cool. 

With careful aim, the Killer Compliment captures everyone. 
It works best, however, when you use it judiciously on new 
acquaintances. If you want to praise friends every day, employ the 
next technique. 



st How to Make ’Em Smile 
with “Itty-Bitty 
Boosters” 

In contrast to the big guns of Killer Compliments for strangers, 
and The Tombstone Game for loved ones, which we will learn 
shortly, here’s a little peashooter you can pop off at anyone, any¬ 
time. I call it “Little Strokes.” 

Little Strokes are short, quick kudos you drop into your casual 
conversation. Make liberal use of Little Strokes with your col¬ 
leagues in the office: 

“Nice job, John!” 

“Well done, Kyoto!” 

“Hey, not bad, Billy!” 

I have one friend who uses a lovely Little Stroke. If I do some¬ 
thing he likes, he says, “Not too shabby, Leil.” 

You can also use Little Strokes on the everyday achievements 
of your loved ones. If your spouse just cooked a great meal, “Wow, 
you’re the best chef in town.” Just before going out together, “Gee, 
honey, you look great.” After a long drive, “You did it! It must have 
been tiring.” With your kids, “Hey, gang, great job cleaning up 
your room.” 

I once read a poignant Readers Digest article about a little girl 
who often misbehaved. Her mother had to continually reprimand 
her. However, one day, the little girl had been especially good and 


214 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Make ’Em Smile with “Itty-Bitty Boosters” 215 


hadn’t done a single thing that called for a reprimand. The mother 
said, “That night after I tucked her in bed and started downstairs, 
I heard a muffled noise. Running back up, I found her head buried 
in the pillow. She was sobbing. Between the sobs she asked, 
‘Mommy, haven’t I been a pretty good girl today?’ ” 

The question, the mother said, went through her like a knife. 
“I had been quick to correct her,” she said, “when she was wrong. 
But when she tried to behave, I hadn’t noticed it and I put her to 
bed without one word of appreciation.” 

Adults are all grown-up little girls and little boys. We may not 
go to bed sobbing if the people in our lives don’t notice when we 
are good. Nevertheless, a trace of those tears lingers. 




ECHNIQUE #56 

Little Strokes 


Don’t make your colleagues, your friends, your loved 
ones look at you and silently say, “Haven’t I been pretty 
good today?” Let them know how much you appreciate 
them by caressing them with verbal Little Strokes like 
“Nice job!” “Well done!” “Cool!” 


Little Things Mean a Lot 

Little Strokes are indeed, little. But as every woman knows, they 
mean a lot. I’ve yet to meet a woman who wouldn’t agree with 
these lyrics from an old song sung by Kitty Kallen: 

Blow me a kiss from across the room. 

Say I look nice when I’m not. 

Touch my hair as you pass my chair. 



216 How to Talk to Anyone 


Little things mean a lot. 

Send me the warmth of a secret smile 
To show me you haven’t forgot. 

For always and ever, now and forever, 

Little things mean a lot. 

To further complicate the art of the compliment, one must 
consider timing. Blatant, barefaced, brazen flattery turns all but 
the blindest egomaniacs off. But the human animal never fails to 
amaze observers. There are moments when, if you don’t give a bla¬ 
tant, barefaced, brazen compliment—even to a bright individ¬ 
ual—you lose. The following technique defines those moments. 




How to Praise with 
Perfect Timing 


I’ll never forget the first time I gave a luncheon speech in front of 
strangers. I’d practiced for the stuffed animals on my bed and my 
roommate, Christine, but this was my debut in front of a real 
audience. 

As I shakily got to my feet, I looked out at seventeen smiling 
Rotarians waiting for my words of wit and wisdom. My tongue 
was dry as chalk dust, my palms as wet as a fish. The audience 
might as well have been seventeen thousand judges waiting to sen¬ 
tence me to eternal humiliation if I didn’t inform and entertain 
each. I gave a last panic-stricken glance at Christine, who had 
driven me to the club, and began, “Good afternoon. It gives me 
great pleasure ...” 

Thirty minutes later, amidst scattered applause which I feared 
was obligatory, I crawled back to my seat next to Christine. I 
looked expectantly at her. She smiled and said, “You know this 
dessert isn’t bad. Have some.” 

Dessert? “Dessert! Dammit, Christine, how did I do?” I 
silently screamed at her. A few minutes later Christine told me how 
much she and, she assumed, everyone else enjoyed my talk. Nev¬ 
ertheless, by then it was too late. The crucial compliment-craving 
moment had passed. 


2IJ 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



218 How to Talk to Anyone 


Quick as a Hiccup, You Must 
Compliment NOW 

When the doctor sadistically smacks your knee with that nasty lit¬ 
tle rubber hammer, you instantly give a knee jerk. And when peo¬ 
ple make a coup, you must instantly hit them with a knee-jerk 
“Wow, you were great!” 

Say they’ve just successfully negotiated a deal, cooked a ter¬ 
rific Thanksgiving turkey, or sung a solo song at the birthday party. 
No matter whether their accomplishment is trivial or triumphant, 
you must praise it immediately—not ten minutes later, not two 
minutes later—immediately. The moment the winner walks out 
of the boardroom, the kitchen, the spotlight, the victor wants to 
hear only one sound: “WOW!” 


Zh 


ECHNIQUE #57 

The Knee-Jerk “Wow!” 


Quick as a blink, you must praise people the moment 
they a finish a feat. In a wink, like a knee-jerk reaction 
say, “You were terrific!” 

Don’t worry that they won’t believe you. The 
euphoria of the moment has a strangely numbing effect 
on the achiever’s objective judgment. 


But What If They Really Bombed? 

“Are you asking me to lie?” you ask. Yes. Absolutely, positively, 
resoundingly, YES. This is one of the few moments in life where 
a lie is condoned by the most ethical individuals. Big winners real¬ 
ize that sensitivity to an insecure performer’s ego takes momen¬ 
tary precedence over their deep commitment to the truth. They 



How to Praise with Perfect Timing 219 


also know, when sanity returns to the recipient and they suspect 
they screwed up, it won’t matter. He or she will retroactively appre¬ 
ciate your sensitivity and forgive your compassionate falsehood. 

We’ve talked a lot about giving compliments, both covert and 
overt. Now let’s talk about a skill that, for many, is even harder— 
receiving them. 




How to Make ’Em Want 
to Compliment You 


We have a national weakness: we don’t know how to receive a 
compliment! In fact, I would like to dedicate the following tech¬ 
nique to my French friends who contend the French are better at 
everything. Well, I concede one point. The French are, indeed, 
better at receiving compliments. I’ll explain how shortly. 

Americans, unfortunately, are beastly at accepting adulation. 
If someone compliments you and you react clumsily out of embar¬ 
rassment, you unwittingly start a vicious cycle. A friend ventures 
a compliment: 

Fie: (smiling) “Fiey, that’s a nice dress you’re wearing.” 

She: (frowning) “Oh, this old thing?” 

Fie: (thinking) “Whoops, she didn’t seem to like hearing that. 
She thinks I have terrible taste to like that dress. I’d better keep 
my mouth shut.” 

Three weeks later . . . 

She: (thinking grumpily) “Fie doesn’t ever give me compli¬ 
ments anymore. What a boor!” 

Fie: (thinking gloomily) “What’s her problem?” 


220 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Make Em Want to Compliment You 


221 


“Girls Don’t Like What?” 

Several months ago in one of my seminars, the group was dis¬ 
cussing compliments. One fellow insisted that “girls don’t like 
compliments.” 

“Girls don’t like what?” I asked incredulously. 

He explained, “I once told a woman she had beautiful eyes. 
And she said, ‘Boy, are you blind.’” The poor chap was so 
wounded by her reaction, he became gun-shy and had not aimed 
a compliment at a female since. What a shame for womankind and 
what a blight on his social skills. 

Upon receiving a compliment, many people demur or proffer 
an embarrassed little “Thank you.” Worse, they protest, “Well, not 
really, but thanks anyway.” Some people toss it off with, “just luck.” 
When you react this way, you visit a grave injustice on the com- 
plimenter. You insult a well-meaning person’s powers of perception. 


“Vous Etes Gentil” 

Leave it to French folks to come up with a congenial catchall 
phrase. Upon receiving a compliment, they say, “Vous etes gentil.’' 
Loosely translated, that is “How kind of you.” 

An American saying “How kind of you” could sound stilted— 
like the little flower girl in My Fair Lady trying to be cultured. 
Nevertheless, we Yanks can express the French gentil sentiment 
with a technique I call “Boomeranging.” 

When you toss a boomerang, it makes an almost 180-degree 
swerve in midair and soars back to land at the feet of the thrower. 
Likewise, when someone tosses a compliment your way, let the good 
feelings soar back to the tosser. Don’t just say “Thanks.” (Or worse, 
“Oh it’s nothing.”) Let them know of your gratitude and find a way 
to compliment them for their compliment. A few examples: 



222 How to Talk to Anyone 


She says, “I like those shoes.” You say, “Oh I’m so happy you 
told me. I just got them.” 

He says, “You really did a good job on this project.” You say, 
“Oh, that’s so nice of you to tell me. I appreciate your positive 
feedback.” 

You can also Boomerang the good feelings back when people 
ask you a question about your family, a project, an event, or any¬ 
thing that shows they are interested in you. 

Your colleague asks, “How was your vacation in Hawaii?” You 
answer, “Oh, you remembered I went to Hawaii! It was great, 
thanks.” 

Your boss asks, “Are you over your cold now?” You answer, “I 
appreciate your concern. I feel much better now.” 

Whenever someone shines a little sunshine on your life in the 
form of a compliment or concerned question, reflect it back on 
the shiner. 

rY 

Technique #58 

Boomeranging 

Just as a boomerang flies right back to the thrower, let 

compliments boomerang right back to the giver. Like 

the French, quickly murmur something that expresses 

“That’s very kind of you.” 


Incidently, in that seminar, I decided to do womankind a favor 
by setting malekind straight on compliments once and for all. I 
asked the fellow who swore women hated praise to give three 
women sitting near him a sincere compliment. He chose the 
woman with “the beautiful silver hair sitting behind him,” the girl 



How to Make ’Em Want to ComplimentXow 223 


with the “hands like a pianist” to his left, and the lady with “the 
lovely deep-blue eyes” on his right. He told them all. 

Three women waltzed out of the room that night feeling a lit¬ 
tle better about themselves than when they walked in. And, I 
hope, for all the women he would yet meet in his life, one man 
left with a changed attitude about compliments. 

As we come to the end of our exploration of praise, I want to 
make sure you’re aiming dead center for peoples hearts. Whether 
you’re giving little Carrier Pigeon Kudos or laying a Killer Com¬ 
pliment on your conversation partner, this next technique keeps 
you on target. 



sp How to Make a Loved 
One Feel You Are THE 
Partner for Life 


Do you remember when you were a kid the hundreds of times 
Mommy’s and Daddy’s friends asked, “And what do you want to 
be when you grow up?” That was our cue to regale our adoring 
audience with dreams of being a ballerina, a firefighter, a nurse, a 
cowboy, or a movie star. Well, most of our lives wound up being 
a little closer to butcher, baker, or candlestick maker. Neverthe¬ 
less, we all still have fantasies of our own greatness. 

Even though most of us cashed in our childhood dreams of 
being the star we thought we’d be (so we could make some 
money), we all know that deep down we are very, very, very spe¬ 
cial. We say to ourselves, “Maybe the world will little note nor long 
remember how brilliant, how wonderful, how witty, how creative 
or caring I really am. However, those who truly know and love 
me—they will recognize my greatness, my magic, my specialness 
over all other ordinary mortals.” When we find people with the 
supernatural powers of perception to recognize our remarkable¬ 
ness, we become addicted to the heady drug of their appreciation. 

Praising someone you know and love requires a different set 
of skills from complimenting a stranger. The formula to bring 
someone even closer to you personally or professionally follows. I 
call it “The Tombstone Game.” It requires a little setup. 


224 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Make a Loved One Feel You Are THE Partner for Life 225 


Step one: In a quiet moment chatting with your friend, your 
loved one, or your business partner, tell him or her that the other 
day y
ou were reading about—of all things—tombstones! “The 
piece was about,” you say, “what people fantasize will be inscribed 
above their grave after they die.” You learned that people want the 
quality they are most proud of in life etched in stone. Then say, 
“The variety is surprising. Everyone has a different self-image, a 
different deep source of pride.” Examples: 

Here lies John Doe. He was a brilliant scientist. 

Here lies Diane Smith. She was a caring woman. 

Here lies Billy Bucks. By golly, he could make people laugh. 

Here lies Jane Wilson. She spread joy wherever she went. 

Here lies Harry Jones. He lived life his way. 

Step two: Reveal to your partner what you would like carved 
on your tombstone. Be serious about your revelation to encourage 
him or her to do likewise. 

Step three: Now, you pop the question, “You know, Joe, when 
all is said and done, what are you most proud of? What would you 
like the world to most remember about you? What would you 
want the world to see carved on your tombstone?” 

Perhaps your business partner Joe says, “Well, I guess I’d sort 
of like people to know that I’m a man of my word.” Listen care¬ 
fully. If he expounds on it, take note of every nuance. Then file it 
away in your heart and don’t say a word about it again. Joe will 
forget you ever played The Tombstone Game with him. 

Step four: Let at least three weeks pass. Then, whenever you 
want to improve the relationship, feed the information back to 
your partner in the form of a compliment. Say “Joe, you know the 
reason I really appreciate being in business with you is because 
you’re a man of your word.” 

WOW, that hits Joe like a 747 out of the sky. “Finally,” he 
says to himself, “someone who appreciates me for who I really 
am.” Telling him you admire him for the same reason he admires 



226 How to Talk to Anyone 


himself has an impact on Joe like no other compliment in the 
world. 

Now, suppose your friend is Billy Bucks, the one who wanted 
his wit carved on his tombstone. You’d say, “Billy, of buddy, you’re 
terrific. I loves ya ’cause you can really make people laugh.” 

“I Love You Because ...” (You Fill 
in the Blank) 

Suppose your significant other is Jane Wilson in the preceding 
example. Tell your beloved, “Jane, I love you because you spread 
joy wherever you go.” 

Suppose your life partner is Harry Jones. You take his hand 
and say, “Harry, I love you because you live life your way.” BLAM! 
You have found that tender spot where the heart and the ego 
blend. 




ECHNIQUE #59 

The Tombstone Game 


Ask the important people in your life what they would 
like engraved on their tombstone. Chisel it into your 
memory but don’t mention it again. Then, when the 
moment is right to say “I appreciate you” or “I love 
you,” fill the blanks with the very words they gave you 
weeks earlier. 

You take people’s breath away when you feed their 
deepest self-image to them in a compliment. “At last,” 
they say to themselves, “someone who loves me for who 
I truly am.” 



How to Make a Loved One Feel Yon Are THE Partner for Life 227 


The Tombstone Game compliments are not interchangeable. 
Billy Bucks might not appreciate your calling him a man of his 
word; Billy’s thing is humor. Jane might not value your thinking 
she lives life her way. Her source of pride is spreading joy wher¬ 
ever she goes. 

It’s wonderful to tell people you appreciate or love them. 
When it matches what they appreciate or love about themselves, 
the effect is overpowering. 



This page intentionally left blank. 



PART SEVEN 

How to Direct Dial 
Their Hearts 

Hundreds of people have formed impressions of you through that 
little device on your desk, your bed table, your kitchen wall. And 
they’ve never actually met you. They’ve never seen your smiles, 
felt your frowns. They’ve never grasped your hand or enjoyed your 
hugs. They’ve never read your body language or seen how you 
dress. Everything they know about you came through tiny fila¬ 
ments, sometimes from hundreds of miles away. But they feel they 
know you just from the sound of your voice. That’s how power¬ 
ful the telephone is. 

Powerful, yes, but not always accurate. For years I dealt with 
my travel agent only by phone. Rani, my faceless agent whom I’d 
never met in person, got me rock-bottom prices on airfares, cars, 
and hotels. But her snippy phone personality really ticked me off. 
A dozen times I vowed to find another agent. 

One Monday morning several years ago, I received bad news 
and had to book an immediate flight home for a family emergency. 
I had no time to wait in line at the airport, so I jumped in a cab 
and asked the driver to wait in front of the travel agency while I 
grabbed tickets and a boarding pass. 

Like a lit fuse, I zipped into Rani’s agency for the first time. 
Seeing my frenzied rush, the woman sitting at the front desk sym¬ 
pathetically jumped up. She gave me a reassuring smile and asked 


229 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



230 How to Talk to Anyone 


how she could help me. As I blithered on about my need for an 
emergency ticket, she smiled, nodded, and lunged immediately 
into action. “What a terrific lady!” I thought as she printed out 
the tickets. 

Moments later, darting out gratefully grasping the tickets in 
my fist, I called out over my shoulder, “By the way, what’s your 
name?” 

“Leil, I’m Rani,” she said. I whirled around and saw a thor¬ 
oughly congenial woman with a big smile on her face waving to 
wish me a safe trip. I was dumbfounded! Why had I previously 
thought she was so snippy? Rani was, well, so nice. 

Sitting back in the cab on the way to the airport, I figured it 
all out. Ranis friendliness—her warm smile, her nods, her good 
eye contact, her body language, her “I’m here for you” attitude— 
were all silent signals that didn’t travel through wires. I closed my 
eyes and tried to remember the voice I had heard moments ago. 
Yes, it was Rani’s same crisp, curt pronunciation. But her friendly 
body language made her seem like a different person from the 
brusque agent I’d dealt with on the phone. Rani’s phone person¬ 
ality and her demeanor in person were completely different shows. 

I realized it’s the same with all of us. Your personality, mine, 
and everyone’s could be likened to a show, a theatrical perfor¬ 
mance. You want to make sure yours is a box-office smash, not a 
flop. The following ten techniques will get your phone personal¬ 
ity rave reviews. 




How to Sound More 
Exciting on the Phone 


I have a friend, Tina, who designed costumes for an off-off- 
Broadway show that became a smash hit a few years ago. The tiny 
show was such a critical success, it won the heart of an angel— 
a backer—and it went to Broadway. There the show laid a big 
fat egg. 

When I read the bad news, I called Tina. “Tina, why did the 
show get such bad reviews on Broadway?” Tina told me that, sadly, 
the director didn’t insist the actors and actresses change their per¬ 
formances to adapt to the new surroundings. The actors’ under¬ 
stated movements, which moved small audiences alternately to 
laughter and tears, were lost in the big Broadway house. Audiences 
couldn’t see their subtle gestures and poignant facial expressions. 
Tina told me the performers neglected to make their movements 
much bigger to fit the new medium. 

That excellent advice is not just for actors. Whenever you are 
talking, you must consider your medium. If your face were on a 
big movie screen, you might get your message across with a wink 
or an eyebrow raise. On radio, however, that would be meaning¬ 
less. Because listeners couldn’t see your wink, you’d have to say 
something like “Hi, Cutie.” Because listeners couldn’t see your 
raised eyebrows, you’d have to say, “Wow, I’m surprised!” 

25 j 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



232 How to Talk to Anyone 


Your body language and facial expressions comprise more than 
half your personality. When people don’t see you, they can get an 
entirely wrong impression as I did with Rani. To get your person¬ 
ality across on the phone, you must translate your emotions into 
sound. In fact, you have to exaggerate the sound because studies 
have shown people lose 30 percent of the energy level in their 
voices on the phone. 

Say you meet an important new contact tomorrow. When 
you’re introduced, you shake her hand, you fully face her. You 
make good, strong eye contact and let a sincere smile flood over 
your face. You even nod and smile, listening intently as she speaks. 
She likes you a lot. 

But how good an impression could you make on that VIP if 
both you and she were blindfolded and the two of you had your 
hands tied behind your backs? That’s the handicap you suffer on 
the phone. 

If she couldn’t see you, you’d have to substitute words to let 
her know you’re agreeing or listening. You’d have to somehow ver¬ 
balize that you’re smiling and use her name more to replace the eye 
contact. You’d be using the technique I call “Talking Gestures.” 

To make up for your missing eye contact, punctuate your 
phone conversations with “Uh huh” or “I hear you.” So your lis¬ 
tener knows you’re nodding in approval, verbalize “I see,” “Oh 
that’s great,” “No kidding,” “Interesting,” and “Tell me more!” 

She didn’t see you hitting your head in surprise? Better say 
“What a surprise!” or “You don’t say!” 

He just said something impressive and he can’t see your look 
of admiration? Try “That was wise of you” or “You’re no dummy!” 

Of course, you need a big verbal smile in your repertoire. Try 
“Oh, wow, that’s funny!” Obviously you’re going to choose phrases 
that match your personality and the situation. Just make sure your 
phone listeners hear your emotions. 



How to Sound More Exciting on the Phone 233 




ECHNIQUE #60 

Talking Gestures 


Think of yourself as the star of a personal radio drama 
every time you pick up the phone. If you want to come 
across as engaging as you are, you must turn your 
smiles into sound, your nods into noise, and all your 
gestures into something your listener can hear. You 
must replace your gestures with talk. Then punch up 
the whole act 30 percent! 




How to Sound Close 
(Even if You’re Hundreds 
of Miles Away) 


When you’re not sitting across from each other resting your elbows 
on the same desk, your forks on the same table, or your heads on 
the same pillow, you need a substitute for intimacy. How can you 
create closeness when the two of you are hundreds of miles apart? 
How can you make the person you’re talking to on the phone feel 
special when you can’t pat their back or give them a little hug? 

The answer is simple. Just use your caller’s name far more 
often than you would in person. In fact, shower your conversa¬ 
tions with his or her name. When your listener hears it, it’s like 
receiving a verbal caress: 

“Thanks, Sam.” 

“Let’s do it, Betty.” 

“Hey, Demetri, why not?” 

“It’s really been good talking to you, Kathi.” 

Saying a person’s name too often in face-to-face conversation 
sounds manipulative. However, on the phone the effect is dra¬ 
matically different. If you heard someone say your name, even if 
you were being jostled around in a big noisy crowd, you’d perk up 


234 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Sound Close (Even if You’re Hundreds of Miles Away) 


and listen. Likewise, when your phone partner hears his or her own 
name coming through the receiver, it commands attention and re¬ 
creates the familiarity the phone robs from you. 

If your listener is drifting, it brings him right back. If she’s 
opening mail, she stops. If he’s picking his teeth, he pulls the pick 
out. When you say someone’s name on the phone, it’s like yank¬ 
ing the person into the room with you. 


Zb 


ECHNIQUE 


#61 


Name Shower 


People perk up when they hear their own name. Use it 
more often on the phone than you would in person to 
keep their attention. Your caller’s name re-creates the 
eye contact, the caress, you might give in person. 

Saying someone’s name repeatedly when face-to-face 
sounds pandering. But because there is physical distance 
between you on the phone—sometimes you’re a conti¬ 
nent apart—you can spray your conversation with it. 



4 How to Make’Em 
Happy They [ailed You 


Brr-ing! No matter whether you hear the ring in the boardroom, 
the bedroom, or the bathroom, self-styled telephone experts tell 
you, “Smile before answering.” Some pros even suggest you perch 
a mirror right next to your phone to monitor your grin. 

Been there, done that, doesn’t work. One evening, in the mid¬ 
dle of my weekly mud-pack facial, the phone rang. The horror of 
seeing myself in the phone mirror made my voice as hideous as 
my face. I immediately trashed the pro’s advice along with the mir¬ 
ror. Who wants to sound like a dizzy Pollyanna? A no-brain 
Cheshire cat? A lonely recluse whose life is so dull that the big 
thrill of the day is a phone call? Any phone call? From anybody! 

Big winners don’t smile before answering. They put a smile in 
their voices after they hear who is on the line. That’s when it 
counts. Answer the phone unemotionally, professionally. Say your 
name or the name of your company. Then when you hear who is 
on the line, the little trick is to let a big smile flood over your face. 

“Oh Joe, [smile] how nice to hear from you!” “Sally, [smile] 
how are you?” “Bill, [smile] I was hoping it would be you.” 

My friend Steve lives in Washington, D.C., and heads a major 
trade association that lobbies on Capitol Hill. Whenever I call 
Steve, I never know which of his dozens of assistants is going to 


236 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Make ’Em Happy They Called You ipy 


answer. Nevertheless, whoever answers gives me the same warm 
response. 

First he or she says, “Cable Telecommunications Association,” 
the individual’s name, and “How may I direct your call?” No fake 
friendliness. No prefab smiles in the voice. I am sure the assistant 
is not beaming back at his- or herself in any mirror. 

When I say “Is Mr. Effros available? This is Leil Lowndes call¬ 
ing,” that’s when the employee becomes superfriendly. “Oh yes, 
Ms. Lowndes,” he or she purrs. “Definitely! Let me put you right 
through.” 

Wow, does that make me feel special! As I’m waiting for Steve 
to come to the phone, I fantasize him sitting at the head of a long 
mahogany table in his weekly staff meeting. I can just hear him 
instructing his staff, “Now if the president or some higher-ups in 
the White House call, put them right through. Oh, and of course, 
if that important woman Leil Lowndes calls, put her right 
through, too.” 

While visiting Washington last year, I had lunch with Steve. 
I took the opportunity to tell him what a pleasure it was to call 
his office and how I appreciated his staff’s warm phone reception. 
I thanked him for familiarizing each with my name and men¬ 
tioning I might be calling from time to time. Steve looked across 
the table at me and blinked. “Leil,” he said, “you teach telephone 
skills. Haven’t you caught on?” 

“Huh?” 

“Forgive me if I’m bursting a bubble,” Steve said, “but every¬ 
one gets that reception, no matter who’s calling.” 

“Oh!” 

When a Pain in the Neck Calls 

“But Steve,” I protested when I’d recuperated from the initial dis¬ 
appointment that I was a victim of a technique and not a VIP, 



238 How to Talk to Anyone 


“what if the caller is unknown, a complete stranger? Surely your 
staffers shouldn’t fake they know the caller.” 

“Of course not, Leil. In that case, I instruct them to show 
energy and enthusiasm over the reason they’re calling. For exam¬ 
ple, suppose the caller is a cable operator wanting to join our asso¬ 
ciation. The caller would get a smile and a sincere, ‘Oh yes, Mr. 
Smith, I’ll put you right through.’ ” 

“Yeah, but suppose the caller is selling office furniture?” I 
challenged. 

“Doesn’t matter,” Steve said. “The salesperson gets the same 
reception after the staffer hears why he’s calling. If my staffer says 
warmly, ‘Oh, office furniture!’ the caller feels good. And I find the 
salesperson is a lot easier to deal with later.” 

I told him, “OK, Steve, starting tomorrow morning, I’m going 
to put that ‘Oh wow, I’m so happy you called for that reason’ atti¬ 
tude in my voice.” 

The next morning, the first call was my dentist’s office. “Ms. 
Lowndes, this call is to remind you you’re overdue for your six- 
month checkup.” 

“Oh, of course, you’re so right,” I cooed. “I’m so glad you 
called.” The receptionist sounded surprised but very pleased at my 
reaction. “I can’t book an appointment right now,” I continued, 
“but I’ll call you as soon as my schedule frees up.” She didn’t has¬ 
sle me with her usual “Well, when do you expect that to be?” She 
just hung up satisfied. (And I got what I wanted—no call from 
my dentist’s office for at least another six months.) 

The second time the phone rang, it was a man who had 
ordered my tape set calling to complain that one of the tapes 
broke. “Oh my goodness, I’m so glad you told me about that,” I 
said with the enthusiasm of having won the lottery. The caller 
sounded a little shocked but obviously pleased at my reaction. “Of 
course, I’ll get another set out to you and I hope you accept my 
apologies.” Caller hung up satisfied. (And I got what I wanted— 



How to Make ’Em Happy They Called You 239 


his good will and word of mouth in spite of my tape duplicator’s 
blooper.) 

The third call was tougher. This was from a vendor I had com¬ 
pletely forgotten to pay. “Oh, I’m so glad you reminded me of that 
bill,” I lied. Again, shocked pleasure was the caller’s reaction. (I 
was probably the first creditor in history who ever sounded happy 
she’d called.) “In the back of my mind I felt there was one bill I 
had overlooked. I’m writing the check as we speak.” 

Then I got my reward. The dunner said, “By the way, don’t 
worry about the 2 percent per month late-payment charge. As long 
as we get your check by the end of the week, it will be OK.” She 
hung up happy. (And I got a present—no finance charges in spite 
of my oversight.) 

And so it went throughout the rest of the day, the rest of the 
week, and ever since. Try it. You’ll find you get a lot more from any¬ 
one when you smile, after you find out who it is or why they’re call¬ 
ing. Use the “Oh Wow, It’s You!” technique on almost every call. 

y\ 

Technique #62 

“Oh Wow, It’s You!” 

Don’t answer the phone with an “I’m just sooo happy 
all the time” attitude. Answer warmly, crisply, and 
professionally. Then, after you hear who is calling, let a 
huge smile of happiness engulf your entire face and 
spill over into your voice. You make your caller feel as 
though your giant warm fuzzy smile is reserved for him 
or her. 



# How to Sneak Past 
the Gatekeeper 


“No, No, Aaaaaagh, not The Screen!” Picture a torture device 
called “The Screen.” The mad scientist, laughing maniacally, 
forces the victim into a giant meat grinder that mashes him 
through a heavy-metal screen. It slices his body into a million mol¬ 
ecules before he’s reconstituted on the other side. Being screened 
when you call someone’s office is the emotional version of that 
ordeal. 

You place your cold call. “May I speak to Mr. Jones?” you 
pleasantly ask. 

“Who’s calling?” a haughty voice responds. Of course, your 
name is not prestigious enough for the screener to grant you the 
exalted status of speaking to Jones. 

Her ruthless interrogation continues, “And what company are 
you with?” You submit your company’s name, praying it will score 
with her. And then to top it off, she has the pluck to ask, “And 
what’s this in reference to?” Aaaaaagh! 

Several weeks after my luncheon with Steve, I had the occa¬ 
sion to call him again. “Is Steve Efifros available? This is Leil Lown¬ 
des calling.” 


240 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Sneak Past the Gatekeeper 241 


“Oh yes, Ms. Lowndes, definitely. Let me put you right 
through.” I start humming happily as I wait for Steve to come to 
the line. 

A moment later his assistant came back and said sympatheti¬ 
cally, “I’m so sorry, Ms. Lowndes. Steve just stepped out to lunch. 
I know he’ll be sorry he missed your call.” Meanwhile, I’m still 
smiling. Do I suspect that Steve didn’t “just step out to lunch”? 
Do I suspect he’s sitting right there? Do I ever, in my wildest para¬ 
noid dreams, think he doesn’t have the time or inclination to talk 
to me? Do I feel screened? No way! I’m as happy as a carefree kit¬ 
ten as I leave my number for a callback. You see, I have probably 
fallen for “The Sneaky Screen.” 


-V 


ECHNIQUE # 6 3 

The Sneaky Screen 


If you must screen your calls, instruct your staff to first 
say cheerfully, “Oh yes, I’ll put you right through. May 
I tell her who’s calling?” If the party has already 
identified himself, it’s “Oh of course, Mr. Whoozit. I’ll 
put you right through.” 

When the secretary comes back with the bad news 
that Mr. or Ms. Bigwig is unavailable, callers don’t take 
it personally and never feel screened. They fall for it 
every time, just like I did. 



How to Get What You 
Want on the Phone 
from Big Shots 


I know a secret about a big cat who owns an international hotel 
chain with properties in six countries. He hires and fires thou¬ 
sands, awards or pulls immense contracts, borrows from major 
financial institutions, and makes lavish contributions to charities. 
Mr. Big Cat (we’ll call him “Ed”) has a respected and immediately 
recognizable name in his industry. And here’s the secret: Mrs. Big 
Cat is the real brains behind the operation. 

I became friends with Mrs. Big Cat (we’ll call her “Sylvia”) 
when I did some consulting for her husband’s organization. Sylvia 
invited me to tea one afternoon. She sweetly apologized that this 
was “maid’s day off” so we’d have to fend for ourselves. As we hap¬ 
pily perched ourselves on the patio and were about to dive into 
our tea and crumpets, the phone rang. She excused herself to 
answer it. 

I heard Mrs. Big Cat say, “No, I’m sorry, he’s not in. Shall I 
tell him who called? . . . No, I don’t know when he is planning on 
returning, but if you give me your name and . . . No, I said I don’t 
know what time he’ll be back . . . Yes, I’ll tell him you called.” 

As Sylvia returned to the patio, I could she was annoyed by 
the call. Always on the lookout for a good phone story, I ventured 
a questioning look. 


242 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Get What You Want on the Phone from Big Shots 243 


Picking up on my curiosity, she said, “That fool thinks he’s 
going to get a contribution from Ed. Ha!” she laughed wryly Her 
candor emboldened me to ask her more. It turns out the caller, a 
Mr. Creighton, was a fund-raiser for a major charity Ed was con¬ 
sidering contributing to. My hostess said Creighton had called 
twice in the past two weeks when Ed was out. “And not once did 
he greet me, ask how I was, or apologize for the disturbance.” This 
did not please Mrs. Big Cat. 

Was it a major irritation for Mrs. Big Cat? No, only minor. 
But did it mean a major loss for the little cat who called? It sure 
did. In Ed and Sylvia Big Cat’s household, subtleties count. At the 
dinner table, Mrs. Big Cat could say to her husband, “A very nice 
man named Creighton called for you today, dear.” Or she might 
say, “A rather irritating chap named Creighton called for you 
today.” One comment or the other could mean millions won or 
lost by Creighton’s charity. And all because little cat Creighton 
mildly ruffled Mrs. Big Cat’s whiskers. 

Home advice: Salute the Spouse. Office advice: Salute the 
Secretary. 




ECHNIQUE #64 

Salute the Spouse 


Whenever you are calling someone’s home, always identify 
and greet the person who answers. Whenever you call 
someone’s office more than once or twice, make friends 
with the secretary. Anybody who is close enough to answer 
the phone is close enough to sway the VIP’s opinion of you. 


A surprising number of Big Cat spouses—and secretaries— 
have deep claws into important business decisions. When it comes 



244 How to Talk to Anyone 


hiring time, firing time, promoting time, or buying time, many 
spouses have a say. When it comes to whose calls get through, 
whose proposals get put on the top of the boss’s desk, who gets 
luncheon appointments made, secretaries’ opinions count! 

Only foolish callers don’t realize all spouses and secretaries 
have names. All spouses and secretaries have lives. All spouses and 
secretaries have feelings. All spouses and secretaries have influence. 
Deal accordingly. 



% How to Get What You 
Want-by Timing! 


When Alexander Graham Bell invented the phone, he and his 
comrades had no use for such trite phrases as “Hi, how ya doin’?” 
Bell and his boys never just started spouting their ideas into their 
listener’s ears. The first words out of their mouths in those times 
were “Can you talk?” Bell and his buddies were, of course, refer¬ 
ring to technical capabilities. 

Little did they know, more than a hundred years later, big 
winners would use a form of that same greeting. Today, of course, 
“Can you talk?” means “Is it convenient to talk?” Before launch¬ 
ing into conversation, they always ask “Is this a good time to chat?” 
“Did I catch you at a good time?” “Do you have a minute to dis¬ 
cuss the widget account?” 

All folks have a Big Ben in their brain that determines how 
receptive they are going to be to you and your ideas. When you 
mess with their internal cuckoo clock, they won’t listen to you. No 
matter how interesting your information, or how pleasant your 
call, bad timing means bad results for you. 

It’s not your fault. Whenever you call someone at home, you 
never know whether she was sleeping or whether there’s a fire rag¬ 
ing in the kitchen stove. Whenever you call someone at work, you 


24s 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



246 How to Talk to Anyone 


never know whether he’s got two hours to get a report in or 
whether the big boss is not-so-patiently sitting on his desk. 

Whenever you place a call, always—not occasionally, not fre¬ 
quently—always ask about your timing. Make it a habit. Make it 
a rule. Make it a self-punishable crime if the first words out of your 
mouth don’t concern the convenience of your timing: 

“Hi, Joe, is this a good time to talk?” 

“Hello, Susan. Have you got a minute?” 

“Hi, Carl, did I catch you good or did I catch you bad?” 

“Sam, do you have a second for me to tell you about what 
happened at the game last Saturday?” 

There are many ways to say it, but it all boils down to “Is this 
a good time to talk?” 

My friend Barry, a broadcaster, accomplishes more in a day 
than most people do in a week. He came up with a clever con¬ 
versational device that ensures he’ll never shatter anyone’s emo¬ 
tional sundial. He calls it “What Color Is Your Time?” Barry 
introduces the device by telling people he’s calling he has great 
respect for their time. He then asks permission to start his future 
conversations with a question that assures he’ll never disturb them 
at an inopportune moment. Barry says he’s going to ask what color 
their time is. They should honestly answer, “red,” “yellow,” or 
“green.” 

Red means “I’m really rushed.” 

Yellow means “I’m busy but what’s on your mind? If it’s quick, 
we can deal with it.” 

Green means “Sure, I’ve got time. Let’s talk.” 

Red, like the stoplight at the corner, means stop. Yellow means 
hurry up, time is short or stop and wait for the next green light. 
Green means go. 

Busy people pick up quickly on his artful device and enjoy the 
game. Most especially, they enjoy Barry’s sensitivity and respect 
for their time. In fact, he says, most of his callers play the same 



How to Get What You Want—by Timing! 2^y 


sensitive game when they call him. “Hi Barry, what color is your 
time? Are you green?” 


Salesfolks, Wait for the Green Light 

A note here for salespeople. If you ask a prospect if he or she has 
time to talk and the answer is “Not really, but tell me what’s on 
your mind,” DON’T! Do not make your sales pitch while he or 
she is red. Do not talk when he or she is yellow. Wait until green, 
very green. (If you ever want to see any green coming from your 
prospect, that is.) 


-V. 


ECHNIQUE #65 

What Color Is Your Time? 


No matter how urgent you think your call, always 
begin by asking the person about timing. Either use the 
What Color Is Your Time? device or simply ask, “Is this 
a convenient time for you to talk?” When you ask 
about timing first, you’ll never smash your footprints 
right in the middle of your telephone partner’s sands of 
time. You’ll never get a “No!” just because your timing 
wasn’t right. 



66 How to Impress 
Everyone with Your 
Outgoing Voicemail 
Message 


You can tell a lot about people just from the outgoing messages 
they leave on their voice mail. “Hello,” his machine answers. “I’m 
not in right now. But you probably don’t want to talk to me any¬ 
way.” Beep. Would you suspect this fellow has an inferiority 
complex? 

“Hello,” her machine answers. “The sound you hear is the 
barking of our killer Doberman pinscher, Wolf. Please leave a mes¬ 
sage after the tone.” Beep. Would you suspect this woman is wor¬ 
ried about break-ins? Most of us don’t record our personal foibles 
so conspicuously for the world to hear. Nevertheless, people can 
hear a lot between the lines of what we say on our voice mail. 

Last month I needed a graphic artist to do some work for one 
of my extremely conservative clients. I phoned Mark, an artist 
whose work I had seen and liked a lot. His answering machine 
blasted ear-splitting rock music through the receiver. Then his 
voice boomed over the electric guitar, “Hey there, dude, don’t be 
crude. Jes’ croon me an earful of sweeeeeeet sounds right at that 
lone tone. Yeah, yeah, yeah.” Beep. I banged the receiver quickly 


248 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Impress Everyone with Your Outgoing Voicemail Message 249 


back into the cradle to shut out horrible fantasies of how my client 
would react if he had to call Mark. His thirty-second talent show 
might have been an appropriate sample of a rock musician’s tal¬ 
ent. But a businessperson should opt for a more sedate outgoing 
message. The message you leave on your answering machine 
reflects your work. Keep yours friendly, neutral, and up-to-date. 

And here’s the secret: to give the impression you are really on 
top of your business, change your message every day. Studies show 
that callers perceive people to be brighter and more efficient when 
they hear an updated message each time they call. If appropriate, 
let callers know where you are and when you intend to be back. 
If you have customers who need to be attended to, this is crucial. 

Try something like this on your office phone: “This is (name). 
It’s Thursday, May 7, and I’ll be in a sales meeting until late this 
afternoon. Please leave your message and I’ll get back to you as 
soon as I return.” That way, if you don’t call a client back until 
4 p.m. he isn’t steaming. 

Also, keep it short. Some people change their message every 
day, but it’s too long. I had a colleague, a public speaker named 
Dan, who in his finest mellifluous voice imposed his thought for 
the day on all unsuspecting callers. 

Last year I was working on a project with Dan and had to call 
him three times in the same day to leave a progress report. Each 
time his machine answered: “Hello, this is Dan, and here’s my 
daily motivator.” He cleared his throat for his big recorded per¬ 
formance and then continued. “Did someone say something today 
that offended you? So what! That’s their problem.” He paused dra¬ 
matically. “Did someone look at you the wrong way? So what! 
That’s their problem.” Again, a pause for the magnitude of that 
sentiment to sink in. “Replace your petty thoughts of anger, exas¬ 
peration, and spite with thoughts of strength. Calm down. Rise 
above those little insignificant irritations in life. Focus your 
thoughts in the direction of fulfillment and accomplishment. Once 



How to Talk to Anyone 


again, this is Dan.” I’m surprised he didn’t also leave his agent’s 
phone number here. “Leave your message at the tone. And have a 
great peaceful day.” Beep. 

The first time I listened to Dan’s “inspirational” message, the 
length mildly irritated me. The second time, I found myself hyper¬ 
ventilating while waiting for him to get through his unbearably 
long message. By the third call, his schmaltzy message seemed 
interminable. I was filled with those “petty thoughts of anger, exas¬ 
peration, and spite” he warned against because of his darn mes¬ 
sage. I found it impossible to “rise above it” and “focus my 
thoughts in the direction of fulfillment and accomplishment.” I 
wanted to punch him in the nose. Outgoing messages are not the 
venues to give inspirational messages or to impress the world with 
one’s accomplishments. 

Another friend of mine, a writer, earned herself a few little cat 
stripes with this one on her machine: 

“Hello, this is Cheryl Smith. Cheryl is on her national book 
tour,” (she paused so all callers could be appropriately impressed) 
“making appearances in twelve cities.” (Another pause as though 
awaiting applause.) “She’ll be returning on October 7.” (What’s 
this “she” bit? Cheryl herself is speaking.) “Please leave your mes¬ 
sage for her at the tone.” Beep. 

Yes, Cheryl, we know you’re an important author. But your 
third-party reference to self, your narcissistic tone of voice, and 
topping it off with twelve cities would make any big cat snicker 
through his whiskers. 

One last codicil: Avoid one particular message many busi¬ 
nesspeople use these days—“I’m either away from my desk or on 
the other line.” The subtext of this message is “I’m a slave chained 
to my desk and it is an amazing fact that I have escaped for the 
moment.” One night I was working into the wee hours. At 4 a.m. 
I decided to leave a message on a colleague’s business phone so 
she’d get it as soon as she came in at nine. “Hello,” the message 



How to Impress Everyone with Your Outgoing Voicemail Message 251 


chirped. “This is Felicia. I’m either away from my desk or on the 
other line right now, but leave your message at the tone.” Beep. 
Felicia, of course you’re away from your desk—it’s 4 A.M. on Sun¬ 
day morning! “On the other line?” At this hour? I hope not! 

You never know how your message is going to affect some¬ 
one. Just keep yours neutral, friendly, constantly changing, short, 
and understated. No boasts, no bells, no whistles. 




ECHNIQUE #66 

Constantly Changing Outgoing Message 


If you want to be perceived as conscientious and 
reliable, leave a short, professional, and friendly 
greeting as your outgoing message. No music. No jokes. 
No inspirational messages. No boasts, bells, or whistles. 
And here’s the secret: change it every day. Your message 
doesn’t have to be flawless. A little cough or stammer 
gives a lovely unpretentious reality to your message. 



67 How to Get Them to 
[all You Back 


Producers of big Broadway musicals can be brutal during audi¬ 
tions. An anxious wanna-be star, after rehearsing his audition song 
for weeks, steps onstage. He opens his mouth to sing. After a few 
notes, the heartless producer shouts, “Thank you. NEEEXXXT!” 
Dreams of stardom dashed in ten seconds! 

Businesspeople’s professional dreams can also be dashed in the 
first ten seconds of their “audition.” Their audition is the message 
they leave on someone else’s answering machine. 

Competent businesspeople wouldn’t dream of sending a messy 
handwritten business letter to a VIP on cheap yellow-stained paper 
and expect a response. They know the recipient would toss it in 
the trash. Nevertheless, some of these same folks will leave a lack¬ 
luster message on a VIP’s voice mail and expect a callback. No one 
ever told them that big winners scrutinize messages on their voice 
mail with the same consideration of a big Broadway producer. If 
you sound good, you’ve got a chance. If you don’t, you are fast- 
forwarded out of their life. 

Salespeople, suitors, candidates, and competitors who leave 
crisp, intelligent, upbeat messages on voice mail get called back. 
Losers with lackluster tones and uncrafted messages never hear 
from Mr. or Ms. Make It Happen. Make sure your message 

2$2 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Get Them to Call You Back 233 


reflects three Cs: Confidence, Clarity, and Credibility. In addition, 
make it entice, entertain, or interest the listener. A flat “This is Joe, 
call me back” doesn’t score with big winners. 


Stay Tuned For . . . 

Radio DJs use tricks to keep their listeners tuned in. Top sales¬ 
people have similar little tricks to entice prospects to call them 
back. Here’s one called a cliff-hanger. To make sure listeners won’t 
switch stations during the radio commercial, the broadcaster 
throws out a mini-mystery: “And right after the commercial we’ll 
be back with the winning ticket ... It could be yours . . . Stay 
tuned!” Whenever you leave a voice mail message for anyone, try 
to include a cliff-hanger: “Hi, Harry, this is Andrew. I have the 
answer to that question you asked me last week.” Or “Hi Diane, 
this is Betsy. I have some big news about that project we were dis¬ 
cussing.” Now Harry and Diane have a reason to call Andrew and 
Betsy back. 

Pitch personality into your message, too. Picture the people 
listening to it. Say something to pique their curiosity or make them 
smile. The message you leave is your ten-second audition. Make 
it good. 




ECHNIQUE #67 

Your Ten-Second Audition 


While dialing, clear your throat. If an answering 
machine picks up, pretend the beep is a big Broadway 
producer saying “Nexxxt.” Now you’re on. This is Your 
Ten-Second Audition to prove you are worthy of a 
quick callback. 



2$4 How to Talk to Anyone 


Incidentally, if someone’s voice mail unexpectedly comes on 
and you are unprepared, quickly hang up (before the beep so they 
don’t get a hang-up message.) Take a moment to craft your enter¬ 
taining, enticing, or interesting message. Rehearse it once with 
confidence, clarity, and charisma. Then redial to leave your great 
hot message. 

A funny thing happens. If your party answers this time, you’ll 
be disappointed. 



&lt;fj How to Make the 
Gatekeeper Think 
You’re Buddy-Buddy 
with the VIP 


The inspiration for this next telephone technique comes from per¬ 
sonal experiences with mid-Manhattan toilets (a less-than-refined 
origin, to be sure). New York City, in spite of all its reputed sophis¬ 
tication, lags some of the shabbiest European cities in one respect. 
Manhattan has few public toilets. And none of those European- 
style, charming, and at times very much appreciated, freestanding 
structures on street corners. 

In the days when I made sales calls around the busy city of 
New York, this presented a problem. Several times a day. I often 
found myself at the mercy of coffee-shop cashiers who jealously 
guarded their restroom facilities. Some shops even put menacingly 
scribbled signs in the window, “Bathrooms are for customers only.” 

I often found that if I played it straight—going up to the 
cashier and asking if I could use the amenities—I’d get shot down. 
So I used the following technique. Without casting a glance at the 
cashier, I’d strut confidently into the coffee shop. I’d march right 
past the bathroom bouncer and keep my gaze fixed on one of the 
booths. She’d assume I was coming for lunch or had simply 


255 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



2$6 How to Talk to Anyone 


returned to collect my forgotten gloves. Once past the gatekeeper 
of the loo, I’d wait for her to be busy ringing up the next check. 
Then, like greased lightning, I’d sprint into the john. 

I dubbed this deception “The Ho-Hum Caper” after my 
feigned attitude of “Ho hum, business as usual. I come here every 
day with nothing on my mind but lunch.” 

Let us now translate that sneaky subterfuge into a seldom- 
fail phone technique. You can use the maneuver to sneak around 
secretaries and dodge their heartless screening. Instead of play¬ 
ing it straight and asking for your party by name, just say “Is he 
in?” or “Is she in?” Using the pronoun is verbally sprinting past 
the secretary with a business as usual, “Ho hum, I call every day” 
attitude. 


Zb 


ECHNIQUE #68 

The Ho-Hum Caper 

Instead of using your party’s name, casually let the 
pronoun he or she roll off your tongue. Forget “Uh, 
may I speak to Ms. Bigshot please?” Just announce, 

“Hi, Bob Smith here, is she in?” Tossing the familiar 
she off your tongue signals to the secretary that you and 
her boss are old buddies. 



69 How to Make Them 
Say You Have Super 
Sensitivity 


Whenever you’re on the phone with someone, you hear a lot more 
than their voices. In the background you might hear dogs bark¬ 
ing, babies crying, or a crackling sound. For all you know, the dog 
has his tail caught in the refrigerator, the baby has to be fed, or 
the house is on fire. When you acknowledge the sound by ask¬ 
ing if they have to take care of it, you warm the hearts of your 
listeners. 

When you are talking to someone at work, you often hear 
another phone ringing. Say immediately, “I hear your other line. 
Do you have to answer it?” Even if not, he or she will appreciate 
the gesture. If he does have to catch the other call, you can be sure 
he heard nothing you said after the first ring. He’s only thinking 
“How can I interrupt this babbling person without being rude so 
I can answer my other phone?” In fact with every brr-ing, irrita¬ 
tion sets in that you are holding him hostage from doing what he 
has to do. 

Here is the technique guaranteed to save you from being in 
that uncomfortable position. 

The subtext, of course, is that you are sensitive to what’s going 
on in your caller’s world. If you’re talking to someone far away or 
in another country, another way to show you’re tops in the com- 

257 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



258 How to Talk to Anyone 


munications department is to translate time references into their 
time zone. When you leave a message, say “I can be reached 
between three and five your time.” 


Zb 


ECHNIQUE #69 

“I Hear Your Other Line” 


When you hear a phone in the background, stop 
speaking—in midsentence, if necessary—and say “I 
hear your other line,” (or your dog barking, your baby 
crying, your spouse calling you). Ask whether she has 
to attend to it. Whether she does or not, she’ll know 
you’re a top communicator for asking. 


And don’t forget foreign holidays. Last July 1, I was on the 
phone with a client from Australia. I was impressed when he 
wished me “Happy Independence Day weekend.” So impressed, 
in fact, I ran out to find a chart of international holidays. I made 
a note in my calendar next January 26 to wish my Aussie friend 
“Happy Australia Day.” 

If you do business with people around the world, be sure to 
extend good wishes to them for their holidays. Forget about your 
own if they’re not shared. I’m still mortified about the time last 
November when I was on a conference call with a Canadian 
client and seven of his salespeople. I wished them all “Happy 
Thanksgiving.” 



70 How to “Listen 
Between the Lines” 
on the Phone 


The first time I saw The Wizard of Oz, the story bewitched me. 
The second time I saw The Wizard of Oz, the special effects 
amazed me. The third time I saw The Wizard of Oz, the photog¬ 
raphy dazzled me. Have you ever seen a movie twice, three times? 
You notice subtleties and hear sounds you completely missed the 
first time around. 

It’s the same on the phone. Hearing it is much better the sec¬ 
ond time around. Because your business conversations are more 
consequential than movies, you should listen to them two, maybe 
three times. Often we have no clear idea of what really happened 
in our phone conversation until we hear it again. You’ll find shad¬ 
ings more significant than the color of Toto’s collar—and more 
scarecrows than you imagined who “haven’t got a brain!” 

How do you listen to your important business conversations 
again? Simply legally and ethically tape-record them. I call the 
technique of recording and analyzing your business conversations 
for subtleties “Instant Replay.” 

Having a tape recorder on her phone could have made a dra¬ 
matic difference in the career of my friend Laura. Laura, a nutri¬ 
tionist, had developed an excellent health drink. It deserved to be 
marketed nationally. 


*59 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



260 How to Talk to Anyone 


I was in Laura’s office one day discussing her plans and I said, 
“Laura, I’ve got just the contact for you. Several months earlier, I 
had met Fred, a man who owned a chain of supermarkets. Fred 
owed me a favor because, at his request, I’d given a pro bono talk 
for a social club he belonged to. Fred was a big banana in the 
supermarket world, and with one “yes” he could put my friend’s 
health drink in his stores. That would launch Laura nationally. 

I placed the call and, lo and behold, he was in. And, an even 
bigger lo and behold, Fred sounded interested in Laura’s beverage. 

“Put her on,” Fred said. 

I proudly handed Laura the phone and their conversation 
started out fine. “Oh sure, I’ll send you a sample,” Laura said. 
“What’s the address?” Then I heard Laura say, “Uh, wait a minute, 
let me get something to write with.” (I rapidly rolled a pen and 
pushed a pad in front of her nose.) “Uh, what’s that again? Did 
you say 4201 or 4102? [I moan inaudibly.] And how do you spell 
the name of the street? [My moan becomes audible.] Whoops, this 
pen just ran out of ink. Leil, do you see another pen on my desk? 
[I did, and this time I felt like throwing it at her.] Sorry, what’s 
that again?” 

Yikes, now I wanted to grab the phone out of Laura’s hands. 
She shouldn’t be bothering a busy big banana for details like 
repeating addresses. She could have called his secretary back later 
for clarification. But even that would have been unnecessary if she 
were recording the conversation with the Instant Replay technique. 
She could have merely mentioned that she was flipping on the 
recorder (most heavy hitters are comfortable with that concept) 
and she would have had it on tape. 

Fred was nice to Laura that day. But my friend never heard 
back from him. And to this day, she wonders why. She’ll never 
know the confused phone exchange nixed the deal. 

Was Fred being unfair just because Laura was a little slow on 
the phone? Absolutely not. Fred figures, “If this woman is as insen- 



How to “Listen Betiveen the Lines” on the Phone 261 


sitive about my time at the beginning of a possible business rela¬ 
tionship, what’s she going to be like down the pike?” Wise choice, 
Fred. I still like Laura. She’s still my friend. But will I introduce 
her to any other big winners who might help her? I can’t take the 
chance. 


How to Set Up Your Instant Replay 

Instant Replay is simple and cheap. Go to your local electronics 
store and ask for a recorder for your telephone. Slap it on your 
phone receiver, and plug the other end into a cassette recorder. 
Then turn the recorder on during your next important conversa¬ 
tion. The device could earn you hundreds of dollars on your first 
call. In some states the law requires you inform the other party 
you are recording them. Make sure to check with the authorities 
about the legality in the state where you live. If it’s one-party con¬ 
sent, don’t worry. You’re the one party. Obviously you must never 
ever use the tape for any other purpose than for your own second 
listening. Not only would that be unlawful, but it would be uncon¬ 
scionable. For extra security, don’t leave people’s taped conversa¬ 
tions lying around. Keep the same tape in your cassette machine 
and use it over and over to record important details. 

With Instant Replay, you can catch balls your conversation 
partner throws out on the first bounce. You’re on the phone with 
your boss. Fie rambles off four or five names in a law firm you’re 
supposed to write to, then the address, then the nine-digit zip 
code. Realizing he’s pitched you some pretty fast balls, he asks, 
“Shall I repeat that for you?” “No thanks, I got it,” you proudly 
say, silently tapping your little tape recorder. Boss is impressed. 

Yet another benefit of Instant Replay—it helps hide your 
ignorance. Recently I was on the phone with a cameraman nego¬ 
tiating a price on a videotape to use as a speaker’s demo. Luckily 
I was recording the conversation because his flurry of Hi-8, VHS, 



262 How to Talk to Anyone 


Super VHS, Beta SP, and three-quarter-inch U-matic had me 
wanting to crawl into a rodent hole in the wall. But I listened to 
the tape of our conversation afterward. I wrote down all the words 
I didn’t understand and then asked a video friend what they 
meant. Now I was able to call the cameraman back and say, “I’d 
like a two-camera shoot on Beta SP. And can you give me a VHS 
dub so I can do some off-line editing?” Don’t you think I got a 
much better price than if I’d asked, “Duh, what’s a Beta SP?” 


4 * 


ECHNIQUE #70 

Instant Replay 


Record all your business conversations and listen to 
them again. The second or third time, you pick up on 
significant subtleties you missed the first time. It’s like 
football fans who often don’t know if there was a 
fumble until they see it all over again in Instant Replay. 


Forget What They Said, Hear What 
They Meant 

Instant Replay also makes you sensitive to levels of communica¬ 
tion far deeper than just your callers’ words. You tune in to their 
real enthusiasm or hesitation about an idea. 

When we want something, our minds play funny tricks on us. 
If we desperately crave “yes” from someone, we hear “yes.” But 
“yes” isn’t always what it seems. A client’s forceful “YES” and her 
hesitant “yeee-sss” are different as heaven and hell. Last month I 
asked a woman who’d booked me for a speech if her office could 
reproduce my ten-page handout. She gave me the answer I wanted, 
which was “yes.” Later, however, I relistened to our conversation 



How to “Listen Between the Lines” on the Phone 263 


on tape. Her answer about the handouts had been a very hesitant, 
“Hmm, well, yes.” I immediately called her back and said, “By the 
way, don’t worry about those handouts.” 

“Oh, I’m so glad!” she purred. “Because we really don’t have 
the budget for things like that.” I gained much more in my client’s 
goodwill than the value of reproducing a few sheets of paper. 

Let us now return to your live, in-person show. We’re going 
to talk not only about how to be a hit at a party, but how to 
smoothly hit on all the folks you want—just like a politician. 



This page intentionally left blank. 



PART EIGHT 

How to Work a Party 
Like a Politician 
Works a Room 


The Politicians Six-Point 
Party Checklist 


When invited to a party, most of us waft into a fluffy thought pro¬ 
cess. Our random reverie goes something like this: “Hmm, this 
could be fun. . . . Wonder if they’re going to serve food. . . . Hope 
it’s good. . . . Might be some interesting people there. . . . Won¬ 
der if my friend so ’n so is coming. .. . Golly, what should I wear?” 

That’s not the way a politician thinks about a party, however. 
While politicians, heavy-duty networkers, serious socializers, and 
big winners in the business world are staring at the invitation, they 
instinctively surf to a different channel. Before they RSVP with 
“yes” or “no,” their brains craft journalistic campaign questions. 
It’s the Six-Point Party Checklist. Who? When? What? Why? 
Where? And How? 

Let’s take them one by one. 


265 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



266 How to Talk to Anyone 


Who Is Going to Be at 
the Party? 

More specifically, who will be there that I should meet? Serious 
networkers calculate “Who must I meet for business? Who should 
I meet for political or social reasons?” And, if single and search¬ 
ing, “Who do I want to meet for possible love?” 

If they don’t know who is going to be in attendance, they ask. 
Politicians unabashedly telephone the host or hostess of the party 
and ask, “Who’s coming?” As the party giver chats casually about 
the guest list, politicians scribble the names of the people who 
interest them, then resolve to meet each. 


When Should I Arrive? 

Politicians do not leave arrival time to whenever they finish get¬ 
ting dressed. They don’t ask themselves, “Hmm, should I be fash¬ 
ionably late?” They carefully calculate their estimated time of 
arrival and estimated time of departure. 

If the party is bulging with contacts, biggies get there early to 
start hitting their marks as each arrives. VIPs frequently come early 
to get their business done before party regulars who “hate to be 
the first one there” start arriving. They are never embarrassed to 
arrive early. After all, the only people who see them are other early 
arrivals who are often heavy hitters like themselves. 

Nor will you find politicians prowling around, the last to slink 
out the door. Once they’ve accomplished what they set out to do, 
they’re on their way to the next opportunity. If their agenda is 
more social, they try to leave their departure time open and their 
apres-party schedule free. That way, if they make an important 
new contact, they can stay around and talk with him. Or drive her 
home. Or go somewhere else for coffee. 



How to Work a Party Like a Politician Works a Room 267 


What Should I Take with Me? 

A politician’s checklist is not the usual, “Let’s see, my comb, 
cologne, and breath mints.” They pack more functional network¬ 
ing tools in their pockets or purses. 

If corporate cats will be prowling the party, they pack a pock¬ 
etful of business cards. If it’s a gala where people are gadding about 
on the social ladder and they want to exude old-world elegance, 
they grab a handful of social cards containing only their name and 
possibly an address and phone number. (Some feel giving out a 
business card in a purely social setting can be gauche.) The most 
vital tool in their party pack is a small pad and pen to keep track 
of important contacts. 


Why Is the Party Being Given? 

The politician’s perpetual philosophy of “penetrate the ostensible” 
enters here. (That’s just a fancy way of saying “look under the 
rug.”) They ask themselves, “What is the ostensible reason for the 
party?” A big industrialist is giving his daughter a graduation 
party? A newly divorced executive is throwing himself a birthday 
bash? A floundering business is celebrating its tenth year? 

“Nice,” politicians say to themselves, “that’s the ostensible. But 
what’s the real reason for the party?” Maybe the industrialist wants 
to get his daughter a good job so he’s invited dozens of potential 
employers. The birthday boy is single again so the guest list is 
heavy with attractive and accomplished females. The business des¬ 
perately needs good PR if it’s going to stay around another ten 
years. So they’ve invited the press and community makers and 
shakers. 

Politicians have expert under-rug vision to spot the host’s real 
agenda. They will, of course, never discuss it at the party. How- 



268 How to Talk to Anyone 


ever, the insight elevates them to a shared state of higher con¬ 
sciousness with other heavy hitters at the bash. 

Their knowledge also makes them valuable agents for the 
party giver. A savvy politician introduces the job-seeking daugh¬ 
ter to some executives at the party or tells the most alluring women 
at the bash what a great guy birthday boy is. When chatting with 
reporters, he talks up the host’s business that needs good PR. 
When people support the real why of the party, they become 
popular and sought-after guests for future events. 

Where Is the Collective Mind? 

Often people from one profession or one interest group will com¬ 
prise most of the guest list. A politician never accepts any invita¬ 
tion without asking herself, “What kind of people will be at this 
party, and what will they be thinking about?” Perhaps there will 
be a drove of doctors. So she clicks on the latest medical headlines 
and rehearses a little doc-talk. If the guests are a nest of new-age 
voters, the politician gets up to speed on telepathic healing, Tantric 
toning, and trance dancing. Politicians can’t afford to not be in the 
know. 

How Am I Going to Follow Up on 
the Party? 

Now, the big finale. I call it “Contact Cement.” It’s cementing the 
contacts the politician has made. After meeting a good contact 
and exchanging cards, practically everyone says, “It’s been great 
talking to you. We’ll stay in touch.” 

This good intention seldom happens without herculean effort. 
Politicians, however, make a science out of keeping up the con¬ 
tact. After the party, they sit at their desks and, like a game of soli¬ 
taire, lay out the business cards of the people they’ve met. Using 



How to Work a Party Like a Politician Works a Room 269 


“The Business Card Dossier” technique described later in this sec¬ 
tion, they decide how, when, and if to deal with each. Does this 
person require a phone call? Should that one receive a handwrit¬ 
ten note? Shall I E-mail or call the other one? 

Use the Six-Point Party Checklist—the Who? When? Why? 
Where? What? and How? of a party—as your general game plan. 
Now let’s get down to specifics. 



7 1 How to Avoid the Most 
Common Party Blooper 


The average party goer, let’s say Charlie, arrives at the bash. He 
makes a beeline for the refreshment table for munchies and a bev¬ 
erage. He then finds a few buddies and starts chatting away with 
them. 

Chewing the nibbles on his plate and the fat with his friends, 
he occasionally looks around the room to see who might be new 
and fun to talk to. He’s hoping several attractive and interesting 
people at the party will spot him and come over to talk. 

What’s wrong with Charlie’s approach? Everything, if Char¬ 
lie wants to make the party productive. Let’s start with the aver¬ 
age party goer’s first mistake—getting some refreshments and a 
drink right off the bat. 

People mingling at a party make judgments, often subcon¬ 
scious, about whom they are going to approach. Have you ever 
lived on a farm? Or had a dog or a cat? Then you know you never 
disturb animals when they are eating. Likewise, when a human 
animal is eating, other human animals do not feel comfortable 
advancing. If party goers’ eyes scan the crowd and see you with 
the feed bag on, they pass right over you. Subconsciously they’re 
saying to themselves, “Let the hungry hound chow down and 


2JO 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Avoid the Most Common Party Blooper 2ji 


maybe we’ll talk later.” Later never comes because they wind up 
making friends with someone else whose mouth wasn’t full. 

Politicians always eat before they come to the party. They 
know they’d need a circus juggler’s talent to shake hands, exchange 
business cards, hold a drink, and stuff crackers and cheese into 
their mouths—all with just two hands. 




ECHNIQUE #71 

Munching or Mingling 


Politicians want to be eyeball to eyeball and belly to 
belly with their constituents. Like any big winner well 
versed in the science of proxemics and spatial 
relationships, they know any object except their belt 
buckle has the effect of a brick wall between two 
people. Therefore they never hold food or drink at a 
party. 

Come to munch or come to mingle. But do not 
expect to do both. Like a good politician, chow down 
before you come. 



72 How to Make an 
Unforgettable Entrance 


Loretta Young makes television history when she appears at the 
head of her immense staircase and surveys the set. Then she 
swoops down to start the show. 

The Pope steps out onto his balcony overlooking St. Peter’s 
Square in Rome and surveys the crowd. Then he begins the 
benediction. 

Bette Davis stops in the doorway and looks around. Then she 
mutters, “What a dump!” 

And every late-night TV comic since “Heeeere’s Johnny!” 
steps center stage and scrutinizes the applauding audience. Then 
he reveals the reason for the smirk on his face. 

What do all these great entrances have in common? Each 
pauses momentarily and looks around before swooping into deci¬ 
sive action. 

Movie directors love shots of THE DOORWAY where the 
camera pans, the music swells, and all eyes gravitate to the hon¬ 
cho or honchoette standing under the frame. Does the star skulk 
into the room like a frightened little kitten in a new owner’s home? 
Or, like many of us do at a party, frantically gravitate to the first 
familiar face so people won’t think he or she’s unconnected? No, 

2J2 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Make an Unforgettable Entrance 275 


the star stops. Then, framed by the doorway, his or her notable 
presence is felt by all. 

People who have mastered this trick have what envious the¬ 
atrical wanna-bes call “stage presence.” Stage groupies think some 
lucky stars are born with it. Think again, thespians. It’s cultivated. 
Politicians don’t just slink unnoticed into a roomful of people. 
Politicians make The Entrance. 

With one simple technique, you too can make great entrances. 
I call it “Rubberneck the Room.” Before entering, stop dramatically 
in the doorway and survey the scene s-l-o-w-l-y with your eyes. It 
is significant that, while you’re standing in the doorway, you’re not 
thinking, “Look at me.” The reason you’re Rubbernecking the 
Room is not to show off. It is so you can diagnose the situation 
you’re walking into. Take note of the lighting, the bar, and most 
important, the faces. Listen to the music, the buzz of the crowd, the 
clinking of glasses. See who is talking to whom. While rubber¬ 
necking, you’ll also be using “Be the Chooser, Not the Choosee,” 
the next technique, which helps you select your first, second, and 
maybe third target. Now, like the big cat who rules the jungle, leap 
in to make your first move toward wiping up the room. 

yL 

Technique #72 

Rubberneck the Room 

When you arrive at the gathering, stop dramatically in 
the doorway. Then s-l-o-w-l-y survey the situation. Let 
your eyes travel back and forth like a SWAT team 
ready in a heartbeat to wipe out anything that moves. 


In tandem with Rubberneck the Room, try using the follow¬ 
ing technique. 



73 How to Meet the 
People YOU Want 
to Meet 


Politicians don’t wait for others to approach them. If the party host 
or their campaign manager has not supplied a “must meet” list, 
they choose their targets while Rubbernecking the Room. As their 
keen eyes scan the crowd, they’re asking themselves “Who would 
I most enjoy talking to? Who looks like they could be most ben¬ 
eficial to my life? Who could I learn most from in this gang?” 

How do they choose? They look at everyone the same way my 
friend, Bob, the caricature artist, looks at people. You can tell a 
whole lot more than you realize if you keep your gaze fixed on 
someone. Every twinkle in someone’s eye and every line sur¬ 
rounding it tells a story—the story of the life he or she leads. Who 
was it who said, “At age thirty, everyone has the face he deserves”? 
Yet few of us consciously look into strangers’ eyes. How foolish 
that, at a party or convention for making contacts, most people 
are embarrassed to make eye contact with people we don’t know. 

In my networking seminar, I prime participants to make 
intense visual contact by asking them to form a big circle, walk 
around the room, and silently stare at each other. “Gaze into each 
other’s eyes,” I tell them. “Examine each other’s movements.” 

As they are walking, I say, “The most important business con¬ 
tact, the dearest friend, or the love of your life is probably not in 

274 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Meet the People YOU Want to Meet 277 


this room. Nevertheless, sometime soon, you will be in a room 
where you will spot someone you sense could change your life. I 
want you to be prepared. I want you to have the courage to make 
the approach and not wait in vain for that special someone to 
approach you.” While strolling and staring, I ask them to silently 
choose the four people they most want to talk to during the break. 

“Only the Beautiful People Will 
Be Chosen” 

When given this unfamiliar and uncomfortable assignment, the 
participants assume everyone will make a beeline for the most 
attractive people. It never happens. Something mystical occurs 
when people take the time to really look at each other. Everyone 
discovers a distinctive beauty in one or two 
other people that is 
very personal, very special, and speaks uniquely to the seeker. 

The dearest friend in my life was a homely little fellow named 
Chip. He was only 5 feet 2 inches tall. Chip had a huge nose and 
funny little eyes peeping out through thick glasses. At a party, 
without using this technique, I probably would never have noticed 
Chip. However, my concentration was on him the day we met 
because he was giving a speech. When I gazed intently into his 
eyes and watched his lips moving, I saw such subjective beauty 
coming from his face. He became my best friend for twelve years 
until a tragic disease took his life. Nevertheless, Chip remained 
beautiful to me until the end because, no matter how twisted his 
body became with illness, the beauty shone through his spirit. 

As the seminar participants explore each other’s faces and 
movements, they discover the subjective beauty in their faces, in 
their spirits. No one can explain why one person chooses another 
as one of his or her special four. Yet practically everyone returns 
from the break having made a new good friend. Never is anyone 
left unchosen. 



2y6 How to Talk to Anyone 


When you seek people’s special qualities by exploring their 
faces, you will find them. If you want to walk out of any gather¬ 
ing with your life enhanced, spend time with people you choose, 
not just those who choose you. Be choosey in who you pick. But 
don’t wait to be the choosee. 


4 * 


ECHNIQUE #73 

Be the Chooser, Not the Choosee 


The lifelong friend, the love of your life, or the business 
contact who will transform your future may not be at 
the party. However, someday, somewhere, he or she will 
be. Make every party a rehearsal for the big event. 

Do not stand around waiting for the moment when 
that special person approaches you. You make it happen 
by exploring every face in the room. No more “ships 
passing in the night.” Capture whatever or whomever 
you want in your life. 


“Sure, in a Seminar, It’s Easy, but 
What About Real Life?” 

Sometimes, after the break, a participant will say, “It was simple 
to go up to people I wanted to talk to this time because you gave 
it as an assignment. But what about at a real party?” Recently, one 
of my participants named Todd asked me this question in front of 
the group. 

I asked, “Todd, how did you make the approach this time?” 
“Well, I just went up and said, ‘Hi, I’m Todd. I wanted to talk 
to you.’ ” 

“Well?” I asked. 



How to Meet the People YOU Want to Meet 277 


It dawned on him that he could use this opening phrase to 
meet anyone at any party. To smooth a potentially awkward 
moment, you quickly follow up with an innocuous question like 
“How do you know the hostess?” or “Do you live in the area?” 
Now, you’re off and running just as though the host had intro¬ 
duced you. 

Of course, other choosey people will be prowling around the 
party. Some of them, after scrutinizing you, will decide you are 
one of the special people they choose to talk to. The following is 
a subliminal maneuver to make it easy for them come over to con¬ 
firm they made a wise choice. 



74 How to Subliminally 
Lure People to You at 
a Gathering 


Have you ever noticed how comfortable you feel sauntering into 
certain rooms? The chairs are arranged in a way that welcomes 
you as if saying, “Come right on in and sit on me.” Conversely, 
you enter other rooms where you must navigate a circuitous route 
around tables and dressers before you finally find a free chair. 

Likewise, some people arrange their body furniture, their arms 
and legs, to say, “Hey, come right on over and talk to me.” Yet 
other people’s body furniture shouts, “Keep out! Approach at your 
own risk.” Shy people inadvertently say “stay away” when they fold 
their arms. They give off insecure signals by clutching a purse, 
clasping a drink, or smoking a cigarette. 

Controlled studies show that party goers are more comfort¬ 
able approaching people who stand with an open body, arms 
uncrossed and hanging at their sides, legs slightly separated, a slight 
smile on their faces. Any object between you and the crowd is a 
subliminal cutoff—even your purse. More people approach a 
woman who sports a shoulder bag than one squeezing a handbag. 
The shoulder bag hangs behind her back, thus leaving the path to 
talk to her open. 


278 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Subliminally Lure People to You at a Gathering 2jp 


Give Them the OF Wrist Flash 

Now, here’s the piece de resistance. Next to your face, your wrists 
and palms are one of the most expressive parts of your body. Palms 
up speak volumes of good sentiments. 

The Pope’s wrists and palms are up when he beckons “Come 
unto me my brethren.” The burglar’s wrists and palms are up 
when he says, “I give up, don’t shoot.” The innocent man’s wrists 
and palms are up when he’s saying, “I don’t know who took 
the money.” Vulnerable, open palms signify “I have nothing to 
hide.” 

They also signify acceptance. When you are listening to a 
business colleague to whom you want to signal acceptance, make 
sure your wrists and palms are up. Even if you’re resting your head 
on your chin, turn your wrists forward. Whenever you are chat¬ 
ting with anyone, give yourself a constant hand check. Make sure 
you don’t point your knuckles directly toward anyone. Let them 
have the pleasure of seeing the soft, tender “come hither” skin of 
your wrists and palms, not the wrinkled “go away” hide on your 
knuckles. 

Romance on your mind? Ladies, let your hands do some talk¬ 
ing for you. Women instinctively turn their wrists and palms 
upward when a man excites them. (In fact, the of wrist flash while 
talking with males subconsciously gives them a sexy jolt.) 


Pave a Clear Path for People Who 
Find You Special 

frightened little jungle cats crouch behind rocks and logs so no 
bigger animals will spot them. In the social jungle, shy people do 
the same. They instinctively seek out corners and sit in seats where 
they won’t be seen. 



280 How to Talk to Anyone 


Zh 


ECHNIQUE #74 

Come-Hither Hands 


Be a human magnet, not a human repellent. When 
standing at a gathering, arrange your body in an open 
position—especially your arms and hands. People 
instinctively gravitate toward open palms and wrists 
seductively arranged in the “come hither” position. 
They shy away from knuckles in the “get lost or I’ll 
punch you” position. Use your wrists and palms to say 
“I have nothing to hide,” “I accept you and what you’re 
saying,” or “I find you sexy.” 


Whereas lynxes and lions stroll confidently to the center of 
the jungle clearing, human big cats in the social jungle also stand 
confidently in a clearing so others can see them. Like a politician, 
position yourself near a doorway since everyone must pass your 
way at some point in the evening. 

Now we come to a technique all politicians use. In fact, some 
political pundits have credited the election of both John Kennedy 
and Bill Clinton to their mastery of the technique I call “Tracking.” 




How to Make ’Em Feel 
Like a Movie Star 


In the 1940s, movies were different. Before experimental films, cin¬ 
ema verite, and nouvelle vague, they had stories. Americans 
hopped in their Buicks—a foxtail tied to the radio antenna and 
baby boots suspended from the rearview mirror—drove to the 
movie house, and watched a story unfold before them. 

Almost invariably, the hero and heroine on the silver screen 
would meet, fall in love, overcome seemingly impossible obstacles, 
get married, and (presumably) live happily after. Oh, the stories 
varied slightly. But there was always a leading man and maybe a 
leading woman. Then there was the rest of the world. The sup¬ 
porting characters could live or die without much brouhaha. But 
every minor event in the star’s life was significant. 

Well, movies may have changed. Human nature hasn’t. Every¬ 
one feels like the star of a 1940s movie. Every trivial event in their 
lives is momentous. “There’s ME. Then there’s the rest of the 
world.” 

What someone had for breakfast, what shoes he chose to wear, 
and whether he took time to floss his teeth can be more impor¬ 
tant to that particular someone than the fall of faraway nations or 
the rise of global temperatures. 

Husbands and wives sometimes share their spouse’s minutiae: 

281 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



282 How to Talk to Anyone 


“What did you have for breakfast, Honey?” 

“You didn’t wear those shoes, did you?” 

“Did you remember to floss?” 

To create an interesting intimacy, big winners make a point to 
remember minute details of important contacts’ lives. They obvi¬ 
ously don’t feign interest in what they had for breakfast or whether 
they flossed or forgot. But to make someone feel like a big star, 
they remember details their contact does happen to share. 

Take their lead. If a prospect mentions he had Rice Krispies 
for breakfast, allude to it later. If, in chatting, your boss tells you 
she wore uncomfortable shoes to work one day, find a way to refer 
to it on another. If your client mentions he’s a resolute flosser, com¬ 
pliment him at a later date on his discipline. It hints he or she is a 
memorable star in the galaxy of people you’ve met. It’s called 
“Tracking” their lives. When you track their minutiae, you make 
them feel like 1940s movie stars and that minor events in their lives 
are major concerns in yours. 


Don’t Leave It to Chance 

Politicians make a science out of Tracking. They keep a little black 
box either on their desk, in their computer, or in their brain of the 
last concern, enthusiasm, or event discussed with everyone in their 
life. They keep track of where the people were, what they said, 
and what they were doing since the last conversation. Then the 
first words of the next phone call or meeting with that person 
relates to that information: 

“Hello, Joe. How was your trip to Jamaica?” 

“Hey Sam, did your kid make the baseball team?” 

“Hi, Sally. Have you heard back from your client yet?” 

“Nice to hear from you, Bob. It means you survived that 
Szechuan restaurant you were going to last time we spoke.” 



How to Make ’Em Feel Like a Movie Star 283 


When you invoke the last major or minor event in anyone’s 
life, it confirms what they’ve known all along. They’re the most 
important person in the world. 

One of the most powerful forms of tracking is remembering 
anniversaries of people’s personal achievements. Did your boss get 
promoted to her present position one year ago today? Did your 
client go public? How much more memorable than a birthday card 
to send a one-year congratulations note. 

Remembering people’s private passions is another. Several 
years ago, I wrote regularly for a magazine. My then-editor, Car¬ 
rie, was obsessed with her new kitten named Cookie. Recently I 
ran into Carrie at a writer’s conference. In early conversation I said 
to her, “I guess Cookie’s a full-grown cat by now. How is she?” 
Carrie’s astonished smile was my reward. 

“Leil,” she squealed, “I can’t believe you remember Cookie. 
Yes, she’s fine now and ...” Carrie went on for another ten min¬ 
utes about Cookie, the now full-grown cat. 

Technique #75 

Tracking 

Like an air-traffic controller, track the tiniest details of 
your conversation partners’ lives. Refer to them in your 
conversation like a major news story. It creates a power¬ 
ful sense of intimacy. 

When you invoke the last major or minor event in 
anyone’s life, it confirms the deep conviction that he or 
she is an old-style hero around whom the world 
revolves. And people love you for recognizing their 
stardom. 



284 How to Talk to Anyone 


A week later I got a call from Carrie asking me if I’d do a big 
story for her magazine. Did she think of me because I used the 
Tracking technique and remembered Cookie? Nobody can say, 
but I have my suspicions. I’ve seen the Tracking technique work 
on too many people to assume the rewards are coincidental. 

How do politicians remember so many facts to track about so 
many people? They use the following technique. 



7^ How to Amaze Them 
with What You 
Remember About Them 


Several years ago, I attended a political fund-raising event in a 
Midwestern state. One guest intrigued me. Sometimes I’d see him 
in animated conversation with several people. Other times, he’d 
be standing alone scribbling something on a card in his hand. 
Then the next time I’d look up, he’d be chatting it up with some¬ 
one else. The next minute, he’d be scribbling in his hand again. 
He repeated this pattern for over an hour. I became as curious as 
a nosy neighbor. Who was this fellow? 

At one point during the evening, I was standing alone by the 
refreshment table. He came up to me with a big smile, a warm 
handshake, and introduced himself. “Hi, I’m Joe Smith.” He asked 
me what I was drinking. I told him white wine and we started dis¬ 
cussing preferences. I happened to mention my favorite white was 
Sancerre. While we talked, I had to bite my tongue to resist ask¬ 
ing him what he’d been up to with the feverish note taking. 

A few minutes later, I spotted a friend across the room and 
excused myself. He asked for my card and, as I walked away, I 
peeked over my shoulder. I knew it! There he was, scribbling on 
my card. That was my opening. I turned back and, trying to pass 
my inquiry off as a joke, said, “Hey, I didn’t give you my meas¬ 
urements. What’s that you’re writing?” 

2&lt;?y 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



286 How to Talk to Anyone 


He gave a hearty laugh at my tasteless joke and said, “You 
caught me!” He turned over my card and I saw one word written 
on it: Sancerre. Then, to assuage my paranoia, he emptied his 
pocketful of people’s business cards to show me scribbles on the 
back of each. I assumed it was just Joes little system to help him 
remember people. It wasn’t until months later that I saw the 
method to his madness. 

One morning I went to my mailbox and found a personal 
postcard from Joe. He told me he was running for state senator. 
Then at the bottom of the card, he’d written, “Had any good 
Sancerre lately?” That won my heart. Had I lived in his state, a lit¬ 
tle touch like that might have swayed my vote to him. 

yL 

Technique #76 

The Business Card Dossier 

Right after you’ve talked to someone at a party, take 
out your pen. On the back of his or her business card 
write notes to remind you of the conversation: his 
favorite restaurant, sport, movie, or drink; whom she 
admires, where she grew up, a high school honor; or 
maybe a joke he told. 

In your next communication, toss off a reference to 
the favorite restaurant, sport, movie, drink, hometown, 
high school honor. Or reprieve the laugh over the great 
joke. 


They may not jump up and down asking, “How did you 
remember that?” Nevertheless, they will remember you. No 
matter how important the VIP, he or she senses a special kinship 



How to Amaze Them with What You Remember About Them 28y 


with the person who refers to other than their usual well-known 
accomplishments. 

Politicians are constantly selling themselves. (If you’ve ever 
wondered why America is called “The Land of Promise,” just keep 
your ears open in election year.) But, of course, to know what to 
promise people, politicians use the next super sales technique called 
“Eyeball Selling.” 




How to Make the Sale 
with Your Eyeballs 


The percentage of sales that Jimmi, a good friend of mine, makes 
is not to be believed. Even his sales manager doesn’t know how he 
does it. But I do. Because he told me. 

Jimmi says the fancy sales techniques he’s learned over the 
years (Benefits Selling, Partnering, Selling to Personality Types, 
Value-Added Concept, Rejection Proofing, Spin Selling) all pale 
next to what he calls “Eyeball Selling.” 

Eyeball Selling is not memorizing two dozen closing tech¬ 
niques. Nor is it verbally sparring with a customer to overcome 
objections. Jimmi says it’s quite simply keeping his eyes open, 
watching his customer’s reactions, and adjusting his sales pitch 
according to how his customer’s body moves. 

While Jimmi is giving his sales pitch, he’s concentrating more 
on how his customer fidgets, twitches, and squirms than on what 
he’s saying. He’s scrutinizing his customer’s involuntary head move¬ 
ments. He’s studying her hand gestures, her body rotation, her facial 
expressions—even her eye fluctuations. Jimmi says when his cus¬ 
tomer is not saying a word, even if she’s trying to give you a poker 
face, she cannot not communicate. She may not say in words how 
receptive she is to your pitch, but she’s clearly telling you nonethe¬ 
less. Jimmi says knowing what turns a prospect on, what turns her 
off, and what leaves her neutral from moment to moment can make 
or break the sale. 

288 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Make the Sale with Your Eyeballs 289 


How Jimmi Finds Out Where the 
Buck Stops 

The product Jimmi sells is expensive lighting equipment. Often 
he must make sales presentations to groups of ten, twenty, or more 
people. He says, “The first challenge in Eyeball Selling is discov¬ 
ering who the real decision maker is.” 

Jimmi meets his challenge in an unorthodox (not necessarily 
recommended) way. Right after “Good afternoon, gentlemen and 
ladies,” he says something slightly confusing. Why? Because the 
surprised group doesn’t know how to react. So their heads all twirl 
like weather vanes on a windy day to look at—guess who?—the 
honcho, the heavyweight, the head man or woman. Now Jimmi’s 
got his decision maker so he can continue Eyeball Selling to that 
person. 


What to Do When You Get Your Cue 

Some signals are obvious,” Jimmi says. “People shrug their shoul¬ 
ders for indifference, tap their fingers for impatience, or loosen 
their collar when they feel uncomfortable. But there are hundreds 
of other unconscious gestures I keep my antennae tuned for. 

“For example, I watch the exact angle of my prospect’s head 
position. If it’s fully facing me, especially if it’s cocked at a cute 
little angle, it means they’re interested. In that case, I keep right 
on talking. But if their head is slightly turning away, that’s a bad 
sign. I take it as a cue to change the subject and maybe talk about 
a different benefit of my product.” 

Jimmi not only tailors what he’s saying to his customers’ reac¬ 
tions, but he actively takes steps to change his prospect’s body posi¬ 
tion if he feels it’s not receptive. He says, “The body must be open 
before the mind can follow.” For example, he continues, “If your 
customer has his arms crossed in front of his chest, hand him some¬ 
thing to look at so he has to unfold them to take it from you.” Jimmi 



2po How to Talk to Anyone 


always carries a briefcase full of props to break down the barriers. 
He has photos of his wife and kids to hand married prospects, snap¬ 
shots of his Skye terrier for customers that have a dog, an antique 
watch to show antique lovers, and a pocket-size computer to show 
gadget fanatics. Jimmi says, “As long as I can get them to open their 
arms to reach for something, I have a shot at their minds.” 

Jimmi also paces the timing of his pitch to match his cus¬ 
tomers’ covert reactions. When his client reaches for an object, he 
takes it as a cue to talk slower or just be quiet. Reaching for a paper 
clip or fondling a folder on the desk says, “I’m thinking about it.” 

Of course, Jimmi is on constant lookout for sales-ready sig¬ 
nals like picking up the contract, fondling the pen, or turning their 
palms up. At that point, he cuts quickly to the close. 

Another cue to bring out the contract-signing pen is when 
your prospect’s head starts bobbing up and down like a plastic 
duck. They’re silently screaming, “Yes, I’ll buy!” Unskilled sales¬ 
people just keep on talking until they finish the pitch they learned 
in training. Many keep talking so long, they unsell themselves. 
Conversely, when customers move their heads back and forth, no 
matter what they are saying, they mean “No!” 


Eyeballing Is Not for Selling Only 

Without a word, your friends and loved ones also show their 
wishes. When my friend Deborah became engaged to Tony, it 
seemed obvious to everyone—except Deborah—that it was not a 
marriage made in heaven. A few months before their wedding I 
said, “Deb, are you really sure Tony’s the one for you?” 

“Oh yes,” she said, her head moving right and left, back and 
forth, “I love him very much.” That marriage never took place. 
Her body recognized what her mind hadn’t yet realized. 

Like a politician, think of your social conversations as sales 
pitches. Even if you have no product, you want them to buy your 
ideas. If your listener turns away while you’re talking, don’t con- 



Hoiv to Make the Sale with Your Eyeballs 291 


centrate on how rude the person is. Like a sales pro, ask yourself, 
“How can I change the subject to turn this person on?” If their 
whole body starts to turn away, use the time-honored personal 
question ploy. Ask about their favorite topic. “George, how big did 
you say that bass you caught last week was?” Or use his name and 
ask a personal question. That’s always a grabber. “Archibald, what 
did you say the name of your high school football team was?” 

We’ve talked about only a few responses. Hints for reading 
someone’s body language could fill a book. In fact, they have— 
many of them. I suggest a few of my favorites in the references . 21-16 
Read up on body language and tune in to its visual channel when¬ 
ever you’re trying to sell to people, get their vote, or convince them 
you’re the best candidate for the job or the role of life partner. 




ECHNIQUE #77 

Eyeball Selling 


The human body is a twenty-four-hour broadcasting 
station that transmits “You thrill me.” “You bore me.” 

“I love that aspect of your product.” “That one puts my 
feet to sleep.” 

Set the hidden cameras behind your eyeballs to pick 
up on all your customers’ and friends’ signals. Then 
plan your pitch and your pace accordingly. 


Wouldn’t it be super to have Jimmi’s success rate with our listeners 
accepting whatever we say? We can if we just keep our eyes open. 


A Quick Review 

That’s all there is to it. You’ll remember to eat before coming to 
the party (the Munching or Mingling technique) to leave your 



2&lt;)2 How to Talk to Anyone 


hands free for heavy networking. When you arrive, you’ll stop in 
the doorway and Rubberneck the Room to get the lay of the land. 
While rubbernecking, you’ll Be the Chooser, Not the Choosee and 
pick your prospects for the evening. When standing around, you 
will be relaxing and inviting with Come-Hither Hands. 

You haven’t forgotten, of course, to use the meeting-people 
techniques from previous chapters. If you spot someone you want 
to talk to, check them out for a Whatzit you can comment on. 
Finding none, just ask the party giver, Whoozat? If the host or 
hostess is not in sight, simply stand near your target and resort to 
the Eavesdrop In technique. 

While chatting with anyone you’ve previously met, you will, 
of course, use Tracking to win their vote or heart and all the tech¬ 
niques in Part Two to ensure the conversation is interesting for 
your new acquaintance. Finally, you’ll employ Eyeball Selling to 
make sure you’re on target with every conversation. And don’t for¬ 
get, as you say “so long,” to scribble material for your next contact 
on your Business Card Dossier. 

It’s a good feeling when you’ve done it all right. Continue 
using these techniques politicians use to work a room, and you’ll 
suffer no more unimportant parties. And, following the advice 
throughout the book, you’ll never strike anyone as an unimpor¬ 
tant person. 

Now we move on to the advanced section of How to Talk to 
Anyone. Some of the following techniques may make you scratch 
your head in confusion. Pay special attention to the ones that do 
because it means somewhere, sometime, you might find yourself 
scratching your head over something much more painful—like the 
bump from hitting a glass ceiling, or why the business deal, friend¬ 
ship, or love affair went sour. You might never know, unless you 
read it here, that it was your own communications fumble. 



PART NINE 

How to Break the 
Most Treacherous 
Glass Ceiling of All 

Sometimes People Are Tigers 

Every week, when I was a kid, my mother took me to the National 
Geographic Society to see a film. The one on tigers invades my 
nightmares these many years later. Sitting there in the darkened 
theater, I watched a mother give birth to three tiny cubs. One was 
born with a mangled leg. I witnessed how all the other tiger cubs 
excluded him. And right there in front of the cameras, he was tor¬ 
tured to death by the others. I remember crying and thinking how 
the healthy cubs were like a few of the kids in my school. Some¬ 
times they could be very cruel. 

My best friend in grade school was Stella and she was a beau¬ 
tiful girl inside and out. But she had a speech defect, a cleft palate. 
And many of our classmates laughed at her behind her back and 
excluded her from their games. 

Kids haven’t changed much. When I give talks for colleges and 
young people’s groups, the discussion often turns to popularity. 
Everyone wants to be liked. Occasionally students tell me stories 

293 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



2&lt;&gt;4 How to Talk to Anyone 


about how some girl has a minor physical defect, say, a crossed eye 
or a nervous twitch. They say some kids laugh and make fun of 
her. Or a boy has a limp so no one chooses him for their baseball 
team. Even if he can run just as fast as the other kids, some of his 
classmates don’t like the image of “a cripple” being on their side. 

The years go by and kids become adults. Not too much 
changes. Adults are not as cruel, happily, about physical disabili¬ 
ties. But they can be brutal about social disabilities. Social dis¬ 
abilities are insidious because often we don’t recognize them in 
ourselves. We can be blind to our social handicaps and deaf to our 
verbal deficiencies. But we’re quick to recognize them in others. 

How many times has one of your associates made a dumb, 
insensitive gaffe? How often have you written somebody off 
because of some stupid move? Do you think he knew what he was 
doing? Of course not. He had no idea he was crossing a line or 
stepping on your toes. Probably no one ever told him about the 
subtleties we’re going to discuss in this final section of How to Talk 
to Anyone. 

We’ve all heard about the glass ceiling some companies con¬ 
struct over women and minorities. People seldom discuss another 
kind of glass ceiling. This one is even more treacherous because 
you can’t legislate against it and only top communicators recog¬ 
nize it. Yet it’s a rock-hard shield. Many bright individuals hit their 
heads on the thick glass as they try to climb up the next rung of 
the ladder to join the big boys and big girls on top. The folks able 
to crash through are the ones who abide by the unspoken rules 
that follow. 

Consider each of the following techniques. If you find any of 
them obvious, give yourself a pat on the back. It means you’re 
already a tiger on that one. Be on the lookout for those commu¬ 
nications sensitivities where you find yourself saying, “You gotta 
be kidding! What’s wrong with that?” 

Watch out! It means someday, somewhere, you might commit 
that particular insensitivity. Then, when a big winner responds 



How to Break the Most Treacherous Glass Ceiling of All 295 


coolly to your suggestion, doesn’t return your phone call, doesn’t 
give you the promotion, doesn’t invite you to the party, doesn’t 
accept your date, you’ll never know what happened. Read each of 
the following techniques to ensure you’re not making any of these 
subtle mistakes, that let the big players lacerate you and keep you 
from getting what you want in life. 



78 How to Win Their 
Affection by 
Overlooking Their 
Bloopers 


One remarkable reaction opened my eyes to yet another differ¬ 
ence between big winners and little losers. Several years ago I was 
doing a project for a client. I had the pleasure of being taken to 
lunch by the four biggest fish in the firm. They wanted to famil¬ 
iarize me with communications problems their company was 
experiencing. 

We went to a busy midtown restaurant at peak lunchtime. 
Every table was filled with a variety of corporate creatures. Upper- 
and middle-management types were lunching in their suits and 
ties or high-collar blouses. Workers and secretaries were munch¬ 
ing in their blue shirts or short skirts. The restaurant was buzzing 
with conversation and conviviality. 

Over the entree, we were in deep discussion about the com¬ 
pany’s challenges. The CFO, Mr. Wilson, was talking about the 
financial outlook when suddenly, BLAM! Not six feet away, a 
waiter dropped a tray full of dishes. Glasses broke, silverware clat¬ 
tered against the marble floor, and a hot baked potato rolled under 
our table in a direct path for Wilsons feet. 

2p6 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Win Their Affection by Overlooking Their Bloopers 2gy 


Practically everyone in the restaurant turned toward the 
humiliated waiter. We heard a cacophony of “Uh-oh,” “But¬ 
terfingers!” “Whoops, watch it!” “Boy, that’s his last lunch here,” 
and a variety of tittering and derisive laughter. 

Wilson, however, didn’t miss a word of his monologue. Not 
one big player at my table turned or blinked an eye. It was as 
though nothing had happened. The restaurant gradually quieted 
down around us as we continued our deliberations. (A few min¬ 
utes later the baked potato shot back out from under our table. At 
that moment, I found myself wondering whether Wilson had been 
a soccer player in his youth.) 

Over coffee, the director of marketing, Ms. Dawson, was dis¬ 
cussing the company’s planned expansion. Suddenly she made an 
expansive gesture with her arms that knocked over her coffee cup. 
Just as I was about to say, “Oh dear,” I bit my tongue. Before I 
could grab my napkin to help, Dawson was dabbing the muddy 
puddle with hers, and not missing a syllable of her soliloquy. None 
of her cool colleagues at the table even seemed to notice the over¬ 
turned cup. 

At that instant, I realized big boys and big girls see no bloop¬ 
ers, hear no bloopers. They never say “Butterfingers” or “Whoops” 
or even “Uh-oh.” They ignore their colleagues’ boners. They sim¬ 
ply don’t notice their comrades’ minor spills, slips, fumbles, and 
blunders. Thus, the technique “See No Bloopers, Hear No Bloop¬ 
ers” was born. 


Let Me Suffer in Your Silence 

I have one friend who every time I sneeze says, “Oh, are you com¬ 
ing down with a cold?” Every time I miss a step on a curb, it’s “Be 
careful!” Every time he sees me after a long day’s work he asks, 
“Are you tired?” Granted, this is small fry in the great bouillabaisse 
of bloopers. And the poor guy probably genuinely thinks he’s 



2p8 How to Talk to Anyone 


being sensitive to my needs. But, darn it, coming down with a 
cold, missing the curb, and looking tired are less than cool. Let 
me suffer—in YOUR silence. 

If you’re having dinner with a friend and she makes a boner, 
be blind to her overturned glass. Be deaf to her sneeze, cough, 
or hiccups. No matter how well-meaning your “gesundheit,” 
“whoops,” or knowing smile, nobody likes to be reminded of their 
own human frailty. 

“Fine,” you say, “for small slips, but what should one do in 
extreme circumstances?” Say a rippling tide of soda is flooding 
across the table in your direction and it will be impossible to ignore 
by the time it reaches your lap. 

If possible, deftly flip your napkin to obstruct the current and 
keep talking. Try not to miss a syllable of the sentence you started 
before the oncoming tide. At this point, your companion might 
mutter incoherent apologies. Adroitly weave a parenthetical “It’s 
nothing” into your current phrase and continue talking. On such 
small sands the castles of big cat camaraderie are built. 

Technique #78 

See No Bloopers, Hear No Bloopers 

Cool communicators allow their friends, associates, 
acquaintances, and loved ones the pleasurable myth of 
being above commonplace bloopers and embarrassing 
biological functions. They simply don’t notice their 
comrades’ minor spills, slips, fumbles, and faux pas. 

They obviously ignore raspberries and all other signs of 
human frailty in their fellow mortals. Big winners never 
gape at another’s gaffes. 



How to Win Their Affection by Overlooking Their Bloopers 299 


If people hate to be reminded of the moments when they’re 
not shining, there is another event almost as disillusioning. It is 
when a talker is shining and the spotlight abruptly pivots to a more 
urgent matter. The speaker is forgotten in the flurry. 

Top communicators put the glow back in the gloomy gabber s 
eyes with the technique that follows. 



79 How to Win Their 
Heart When Their 
Tongue Is Faltering 


In ancient Japan, if you saved someone’s life, it was their self- 
imposed task to spend the rest of their life serving you. Nowadays, 
if you rescue someone’s story, a molecule of that ancient instinct 
still gushes through his or her veins. 

It happens all the time. Someone in a group is telling a story 
and, just before their big point, BOOM! There’s an interruption. 
Someone new joins the group, a catering person with a tray of 
crackers and cheese comes over, or a baby starts crying. Suddenly 
everyone’s attention turns to the new arrival, the nibbles on the 
tray, or the “adorable” little tyke. Nobody is aware of the inter¬ 
ruption—except the speaker. They forget all about the fact that 
the speaker hasn’t made his or her point. 

Or you’re all sitting around the living room and someone is 
telling a joke. Suddenly, just before their big punch line, little 
Johnny drops a dish or the phone rings. After the crash, everyone 
talks about little Johnny’s clumsiness. After the call, the subject 
turns to the impending marriage or medical operation of the caller. 
Nobody remembers the great punch line got aborted—except the 
joke teller. (When it’s you regaling everyone at a restaurant, have 


300 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Win Their Heart When Their Tongue Is Faltering }0i 


you ever noticed how you can almost set your clock by the waiter 
coming to take everyone’s order just before your hilarious punch 
line?) 

Most joke and story tellers are too timid to say, after the inva¬ 
sion, “Now, as I was saying . . Instead, they’ll spend the rest of 
the evening feeling miserable they didn’t get to finish. Here’s where 
you come in. Rescue them with the technique I call “Lend a Help¬ 
ing Tongue.” 

Watch the gratitude in the storyteller’s eyes as he stabilizes 
where his story sunk and he sails off again toward the center of 
attention. His expression and the recognition of your sensitivity by 
the rest of the group are often reward enough. You are even more 
fortunate if you can rescue the story of someone who can hire you, 
promote you, buy from you, or otherwise lift your life. Big winners 
have elephantine memories. When you do them subtle favors like 
Lend a Helping Tongue, they find a way to pay you back. 




ECHNIQUE #79 

Lend a Helping Tongue 


Whenever someone’s story is aborted, let the interrup¬ 
tion play itself out. Give everyone time to dote on the 
little darling, give their dinner order, or pick up the 
jagged pieces of china. 

Then, when the group reassembles, simply say to the 
person who suffered story-interruptus, “Now please get 
back to your story.” Or better yet, remember where they 
were and then ask, “So what happened after the . . .” 
(and fill in the last few words). 



502 How to Talk to Anyone 


Harvey Mackay, the world’s most notable networker who rose 
from envelope salesman to corporate CEO and one of Americas 
most sought-after business and motivational speakers, teaches us 
that the world goes ’round on favors. How right he is! The next 
three techniques reveal unspoken subtleties of this critical balance 
of power. 



How to Let ’Em 
Know “What’s In It” 
for Them 


Savvy businesspeople know everyone is constantly tuned to the 
same radio station—WIIFM. Whenever anyone says anything, the 
listener’s instinctive reaction is “what’s in it for me?” Sales pros 
have elevated this constant query to the exalted status of acronym, 
WIIFM. They pay such strict attention to the WIIFM principle 
that they don’t open their pitch with the features of their product 
or service. Top pros start by highlighting the benefits to the buyer. 

Except for tactical reasons during sensitive negotiating, big 
winners lay both “what’s in it for me?” and “what’s in it for you?” 
(WIIFY) right out on the table. This is so critical that, if one cam¬ 
ouflages WIIFM or WIIFY, the concealer is relegated to the sta¬ 
tus of little loser. 

I once invited a casual acquaintance to lunch. I had hoped to 
consult with Sam, the head of a marketing association, on my 
speaking business. I told him my desire and jokingly asked if an 
hour of his valuable time was available in return for lunch at a great 
restaurant. That was my way of saying, “Look Sam, I know there’s 
no real benefit to you except a tasty lunch and the dubious plea¬ 
sure of my company.” (In other words, I was revealing WIIFY.) 
To make the meeting even more convenient for him, I said, “Sam, 
choose the date and the best restaurant in your neighborhood.” 

303 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



304 How to Talk to Anyone 


The day of our lunch consultation rolled around and I trav¬ 
eled forty-five minutes across town to his chosen restaurant. As I 
entered, I was surprised to see an assortment of people arranged 
around the largest table in the room with Sam as the smiling cen¬ 
terpiece. Obviously, this was not the setting in which I could con¬ 
sult with him. Unfortunately, Sam had already spotted me by the 
coat check. I was trapped. 

It wasn’t until after-lunch coffee arrived that I realized why 
Sam had assembled the group. He wanted each to donate presen¬ 
tations on their particular expertise to his organization. The sly 
fox hadn’t revealed his own “what’s in it for me?” 

Had Sam been a straight shooter and big player, he would 
have told me on the phone, “Leil, I’m getting a group of speakers 
who might be helpful to my organization together for a Dutch- 
treat lunch. I will, of course, try to answer your questions about 
your speaking business, but we will be a group of ten. Would you 
like to join us, or shall we choose another date when we can have 
more privacy?” 

I would gladly have spoken pro bono for Sam’s group had he 
been up-front about it. Instead, by not revealing WIIFM, we both 
lost. I lost a half day and, because of his trickiness, he lost my free 
speech for his group. 

Don’t Deny Them the Pleasure 
of Helping You 

Big winners also lay their cards on the table when asking someone 
for a favor. Many well-meaning folks are embarrassed to say how 
important the favor is to them. So they ask as though it’s a casual 
inquiry when it’s not. 

A friend of mine named Stefan once asked me if I knew any 
bands his organization could hire for their annual event. I told him 
“No, I’m sorry. I really don’t.” But Stefan didn’t let it go at that. 
He pressed, “Leil, didn’t you once work with bands on ships?” 



How to Let ’Em Know “What’s In It”for Them 505 


I told him “Yes, but I no longer have contact with them.” I 
thought that was the end of it. But Stefan didn’t. He grilled me 
further and I found myself getting confused and irritated. Finally 
I said, “Stefan, who’s in charge of getting the band?” 

He sheepishly said, “I am.” 

“Criminy jicketts, Stefan, why didn’t you tell me it was your 
responsibility? In that case, let me do some research and see if I 
can find a good one for you.” I was happy to do my friend a favor. 
But Stefan, by not telling me how important it was to him, risked 
not getting help. He also went down a notch or two in his friend’s 
esteem by not revealing WIIFM. 

When asking someone for a favor, let them know how much 
it means to you. You come across as a straight shooter, and the joy 
of helping you out is often reward enough. Don’t deny them that 
pleasure! 




ECHNIQUE #80 

Bare the Buried WIIFM (and WIIFY) 


Whenever you suggest a meeting or ask a favor, divulge 
the respective benefits. Reveal what’s in it for you and 
what’s in it for the other person—even if it’s zip. If any 
hidden agenda comes up later, you get labeled a sly fox. 


Asking or granting favors is a fabric that holds together only 
when woven with utmost sensitivity. Let us explore more ways to 
stitch this delicate cloth so your relationship doesn’t rip. 



8 i How to Make Them 
Want to Do Favors 
for You 


One of my clients, Susan Evans, heads up a large real estate firm. 
Once, sitting in her office discussing an upcoming project, her sec¬ 
retary buzzed. “Excuse me, Ms. Evans, it’s your brother-in-law 
Harry on the phone.” 

“Oh, of course,” she smiled, “put him on.” My client, mak¬ 
ing apologies for the interruption, picked up the phone. I left the 
room for a few moments to give her privacy. 

When I returned, Susan was just hanging up, saying, “Sure, 
have him phone me.” She told me the call was from her brother- 
in-law whose young cousin worked in a gas station but was inter¬ 
ested in a career in real estate. “The young man is going to call 
me and I’ll see if I can help him out.” It was obvious she was happy 
to do her brother-in-law a favor. We picked up our discussion 
where we left off. 

Not four minutes later, the secretary buzzed again. “Ms. 
Evans, a Sonny Laker is on the line. He says he’s your brother-in- 
law Harry’s cousin and he’s supposed to call you.” My client was 
taken aback. I could tell from her expression she was saying to her¬ 
self, “Boy, my overanxious brother-in-law didn’t waste any time, 
did he?” It seemed obvious to both of us what had happened. Like 




Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Make Them Want to Do Favors for You 307 


greased lightning, Harry must have hot-breathedly called Cousin 
Sonny to give him the big headline: Evans Would See Him! Then, 
by dialing Ms. Evans immediately, Sonny made it seem the big- 
deal interview was the most important event in his otherwise dull 
and dismal life. 

True or not, one verity remained—Little Cousin was insensi¬ 
tive to an unspoken rule big winners always obey: don’t jump 
immediately when someone is doing you a favor. Allow the per¬ 
son granting the favor time to savor the pleasure of agreeing to it, 
before having to pay up. 

Both brother-in-law and potential employee slipped in Evans’s 
estimate, all because of timing. To ensure the kid wouldn’t call his 
real-estate-mogul sister-in-law too quickly, Harry should have 
waited a day before telling his cousin the good news. Also, young 
Sonny should have asked Cousin Harry about Evans’s schedule. 
Sometimes an immediate call is advantageous but not when some¬ 
one is granting you a favor. 

yK 

Technique #8i 

Let ’Em Savor the Favor 

Whenever a friend agrees to a favor, allow your 

generous buddy time to relish the joy of his or her 

beneficence before you make them pay the piper. 

How long? At least twenty-four hours. 


One might think Evans was unfair judging Sonny harshly just 
because he didn’t let her savor the favor. It runs deeper than that. 
Evans’s subconscious thought process goes something like this: “If 
this kid is insensitive to the subtleties of timing when getting a 



308 How to Talk to Anyone 


job, how sensitive is he going to be when negotiating the sale of a 
house?” One agent’s overanxious call to an owner can mean thou¬ 
sands lost in commissions for the firm. 

Big winners have supernatural vision into your future. They 
see every communications blunder you make as a visible blotch on 
your x-ray. It dims your prognosis for being successful in life. 

Let’s look at yet another tenuous thread between favor asker 
and favor grantor that must not be severed lest the relationship 
unravel. 



82 How to Ask for Favors 
(and Get Them!) 


I once asked a well-connected friend who works in a top Los 
Angeles talent agency if she knew any celebrities I could contact 
for a project I was working on. Tania flipped though her Rolodex 
and came up with just the names I needed. It was obvious to both 
of us, I owed her big time. 

When I thanked her profusely on the phone, Tania said, “Oh 
I’m sure you’ll find a way to pay me back.” 

“Well, of course I will,” I said. “That goes without saying.” 
And well it should have gone without saying. She was reminding 
me the favor wasn’t out of friendship, but because she expected 
something in return. 

Two days later, Tania called and said she was coming to New 
York in a few months. She was just checking now if I could put 
her up then. Naturally I could, but blatantly cashing in on the 
return favor so quickly was not a smooth move. When someone 
does something nice for you, you find yourself with an elephant’s 
memory. In fact, you consciously look for ways to return the favor. 
Had Tania called, even years later, of course I would have remem¬ 
bered “I owed her one.” Frankly, I was glad it came up so quickly 
so I could even the score. Nevertheless, I do wish the whole barter 
aspect had been left unspoken. It tarnished what should have been 

309 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



3io How to Talk to Anyone 


a generous sharing on both sides. Tarnish always wears off on the 
tarnisher. 

When you do someone a favor and they obviously “owe you 
one,” wait a few weeks. Don’t make it look like tit for tat. Allow 
the favor asker the pleasurable myth that you joyfully did the favor 
with no thought of what you’re going to get in return. They know 
that’s not true. You know that’s not true. But only little losers make 
it obvious. 


Zb 


ECHNIQUE #82 

Tit for (Wait ... Wait) Tat 


When you do someone a favor and it’s obvious that “he 
owes you one,” wait a suitable amount of time before 
asking him to “pay.” Let him enjoy the fact (or fiction) 
that you did it out of friendship. Don’t call in your tit 
for their tat too swiftly. 


The next three techniques also involve timing, not of favors, 
but of important discussions. 



83 


How to Know What 
Not to Say at Parties 


When police were hot on the tail of a thief in ancient times, he’d 
frantically seek a church to duck into. The crook knew if he could 
get to an altar, the frustrated posse could not arrest him until he 
came out. 

When a pack of wolves in the jungle is in hot pursuit of a 
jackrabbit, the frightened bunny’s eyes seek a hollow log. He 
knows the wolves can’t devour him until he emerges. 

Likewise in the human jungle, big cats have certain safe havens. 
Although unspoken, they are as secure as the tenth-century altar 
or a hole in the log. At clearly understood times and places, even 
the toughest tiger knows he must not attack. I call these “safe 
havens.” 

I have a friend, Kirstin, the president of an advertising agency 
who each year invites me to her company’s Christmas party. One 
year, the holiday spirit was in extra-high swing. Conviviality was 
high and champagne flowed freely. It was a terrific bash. 

The evening wore on, more bubbly flowed, and the decibel 
level of the holiday revelers went up and up. So high, in fact, that 
Kirstin told me she was going to tiptoe out the back door and 
offered to drop me off at my place. 


3 IJ 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



jx2 How to Talk to Anyone 


As we were making our way toward the exit, we heard a woozy 
voice in the crowd, “Oh Kirrr-stin, Kirrr-stin!” A mail-room 
worker, warped with too much seasonal spirit, wobbled up to her 
boss and said, “You know, thish ish a great party, a grr-reat party. 
But I been doin’ some figuring. If half what it cost went into a 
child-care facility for the seven, count ’em, seven mothers with 
preschool children who work here ...” 

Kirstin, a top communicator, took Jane’s hands in hers and 
gave her a big smile. She said, “Jane, you’re obviously excellent at 
math. You’re right, just about half of what this party cost would 
indeed pay for the opening of such a facility. Let’s talk about it 
during business hours.” We then made a swift departure. 

On the way back to my place, she let out a big breath and said, 
“Whew, I’m glad that’s over.” 

“Didn’t you enjoy the party, Kirstin?” I asked. 

“Well, sure,” she said, “But you never know what’s going to 
happen. For instance,” she said, “that remark Jane made.” She 
went on to explain management had already had several meetings 
about opening a child-care facility for employees. In fact, plans 
for turning an unused storage area into a beautiful nursery were 
already in the works. Naively, I asked Kirstin why she hadn’t men¬ 
tioned that to Jane. 

“It wasn’t the right time or place.” Kirstin had handled the sit¬ 
uation at the party the way any big winner would—no spoken 
confrontation now (but probable silent condemnation later). 

Jane, unfortunately, had broken the first unspoken safe-haven 
rule, “Parties Are for Pratter.” Did Kirstin chastise Jane? Did she 
punish her inappropriate behavior? Not then, of course. Never¬ 
theless, Jane would probably feel the repercussions a few months 
down the pike when it came to promotion time. But by then poor 
Jane wouldn’t even know why she was passed over. 

Will it be because of a one-time overimbibing? Jane might 
grumble, “Yes.” Jane is wrong. It’s simply that big players can’t take 



How to Know What Not to Say at Parties 313 


the chance that one of their key people will feel too much holiday 
spirit at another party and next time confront an important client. 


4 


ECHNIQUE #83 

Parties Are for Pratter 


There are three sacred safe havens in the human jungle 
where even the toughest tiger knows he must not 
attack. The first of these is parties. 

Parties are for pleasantries and good fellowship, not 
for confrontations. Big players, even when standing 
next to their enemies at the buffet table, smile and nod. 
They leave tough talk for tougher settings. 


Lets move to the second safe haven where big cats can escape 
the claws of bigger cats and, they hope, the growls of lesser ones. 




How to Know What 
Not to Say at Dinner 


Did you ever wonder why business lunches between big bosses go 
on interminably long, sometimes well into the afternoon? Did you 
ever suspect it’s just because they like to sit, drink, and massage 
each other on the company expense account? Perhaps there’s an 
element of that. But the main reason is because the dining table 
is an even more sacred safe haven than a party. Big boys and big 
girls realize, whether it’s a business dinner, lunch, or breakfast, 
breaking bread together is a time when they must discuss no 
unpleasant aspects of the business. After all, tough negotiating can 
kill your appetite. 

Let’s listen in on an average business lunch between big play¬ 
ers. We hear the clanking of glasses as they consume drinks over 
convivial conversation. They are discussing golf, the weather, and 
making general observations about the state of the business. Dur¬ 
ing the main course, the discourse turns to food, the arts, current 
affairs, and other nonthreatening subjects. 

“Wasted time?” one might ask. Not at all! The big players are 
watching each other’s moves very carefully, calculating each other’s 
skills, knowledge, prowess. Like NFL scouts observing college 
football practice, they’re determining who’s got the right stuff. Big 


3H 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Know What Not to Say at Dinner 315 


players know how people handle themselves at a social occasion is 
an accurate barometer of their big-business muscle. As they are 
smiling and laughing at each other’s jokes, they are all making 
silent critical judgments. 

Finally, coffee arrives. At this point one or more of the biggies 
gently broaches the business at hand. Naturally, he or she does it 
with supposed reluctance, trying to repress the obvious relief that 
at last they can get down to significant stuff. He exudes, “What a 
shame such genial company should have to concern itself with 
mundane matters like making money.” 

Only after they have played out this crucial charade can they 
discuss business. But no dirty business. The biggies can brainstorm 
over coffee. They can discuss proposals over dessert. They can toss 
around new ideas over cordials. They can explore the positive side 
of the merger, the acquisition, or the partnership while waiting for 
the check. 

However, should any disagreement, misunderstanding, or 
controversial aspect arise, they must immediately relegate it to 
another table, the conference table. 


-1 


ECHNIQUE #84 

Dinner’s for Dining 


The most guarded safe haven respected by big winners 
is the dining table. Breaking bread together is a time 
when they bring up no unpleasant matters. While 
eating, they know it’s OK to brainstorm and discuss the 
positive side of the business: their dreams, their desires, 
their designs. They can free associate and come up with 
new ideas. But no tough business. 



316 How to Talk to Anyone 


This convention probably arose out of a prudent agreement 
not to inflict indigestion on each other. Tough negotiating is 
unpalatable and can ruin an otherwise perfectly mouthwatering 
veal chop. 

Incidentally, the same rule applies in the social jungle. If one 
partner in a friendship or a love relationship has some heavy rela¬ 
tionship issues to discuss, save them for after dessert. Even if you 
don’t solve the problem, you want to enjoy the delicious chocolate 
souffle. 

Let’s crawl into our third and final safe haven to explore it. 



8 s How to Know What 
Not to Say in a 
Chance Meeting 


William, who sells widgets, has been trying to get Big Winner on 
the phone for weeks to see if B.W.’s company will buy his line of 
widgets. Big Winner is still considering Willie’s widgets and plans 
eventually to return his call. However, at this point in our story, 
our little hero’s phone has not rung. 

It just so happens, one evening Willie finds himself standing 
behind Big Winner in the supermarket line. 

“What good fortune!” thinks Willie. 

“Oh hell!” thinks Big Winner. “I hope he’s not going to hit 
me with talk of his widgets at this hour.” 

Those who appreciate safe havens know there are two very 
different endings to this story. The Willie who brings up widgets 
with an “Aha, I’ve got you now” gleam in his eye, never gets his 
call returned. Even if Big Winner preferred Willie’s widgets above 
all others, he would find the supermarket entrapment sufficiently 
painful to punish the little loser. 

However, the Willie who just says “Hello there, B.W. How 
good to see you,” with nary a word of widgets, shows he’s a big 
player, too. This Willie will most certainly get his call returned— 
probably the next day—out of Big Winner’s relief and gratitude 
for Willie’s graciousness. 


3i7 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



jrf How to Talk to Anyone 


Zb 


ECHNIQUE #85 

Chance Encounters Are for Chitchat 


If you’re selling, negotiating, or in any sensitive 
communication with someone, do NOT capitalize on a 
chance meeting. Keep the melody of your mistaken 
meeting sweet and light. Otherwise, it could turn into 
your swan song with Big Winner. 


Consistently create safe havens for people if you want them 
to elevate you to the status of big winner. You may find yourself 
dining with them, going to parties with them, getting big “hellos” 
in the hall, and closing deals much faster than during business 
hours. Who knows? If it’s your desire, you even make yourself eli¬ 
gible for some heavy socializing at the top. Big winners make it 
safe for each other to accept invitations to play golf, spend the 
weekend in their country homes, or relax by each other’s pools. 
They know there will be no sharks swimming in the water, no 
razor blades buried in the shrimp cocktail. 



86 How to Prepare Them 
to Listen to You 


Once night, several years ago on a New York City street, I caught 
a man trying to break into a car. I shouted for him to stop. Instead 
of being content escaping, the burly would-be burglar decided to 
retaliate. As he raced past me, he shoved me down onto the 
cement and I cracked my skull against the curb. 

Dizzily, I wobbled into the emergency room of a nearby hos¬ 
pital. Holding an ice pack against my throbbing head, I was grilled 
by the emergency room triage nurse on my address, telephone, and 
social security numbers, insurance carrier, policy number, ad nau¬ 
seam. It’s as if she had said,’’The heck with your cracked skull. You 
can tell me about that later. What’s your insurance number?” 

Don’t bother me with that minutiae! All I wanted to do was 
tell somebody, anybody, what happened to me. It wasn’t until the 
very end of her ruthless and sadistic interrogation that she asked, 
“So what happened?” 

I later told my sad story to a friend, Sue, a nurse who works 
in admitting in another emergency room. She said, “I know. I can’t 
believe they print the forms that way. Injured people don’t get to 
tell what happened to them until the last line of the form. Sue said 
getting crucial numerical details from people suffering in the ER 
with broken bones and burns was a real challenge. Until, she said, 

3i9 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



J20 How to Talk to Anyone 


she switched her questioning around. She’d first ask them what 
happened. They’d tell her all about it. She’d listen sympathetically. 
“Then,” she said, “they were only too happy to give me the infor¬ 
mation I needed.” 

Good bosses understand this human need to talk. Robert, a 
colleague of mine who owns a small manufacturing firm, says 
whenever one of his employees complains about a problem, he 
never holds the griper’s feet to the fire for facts first. He hears the 
employee out completely. He lets him carry on about the cantan¬ 
kerous customer, the uncooperative coworker. “Then, after he’s 
gotten it off his chest,” Robert says, “I get the facts a lot more 
clearly.” 

When You Have Important Information 
to Impart 

Any kid working in a garage knows you can’t pump more gas into 
a full tank. Too much topping it off, and it splashes onto the cement. 
Likewise, your listener’s brain is always full of his or her own 
thoughts, worries, and enthusiasms. If you pump your ideas into 
your listener’s brain, which is full of her own notions, you’ll get a 
polluted mixture, then a spill. If you want your supersupreme ideas 
to flow into her tank unpolluted, drain her tank completely first. 


Zh 


ECHNIQUE #86 

Empty Their Tanks 


If you need information, let people have their entire say 
first. Wait patiently until their needle is on empty and 
the last drop drips out and splashes on the cement. It’s 
the only way to be sure their tank is empty enough of 
their own inner noise to start receiving your ideas. 



How to Prepare Them to Listen to You 321 


Whenever you are discussing emotionally charged matters, let 
the speaker finish completely before you jump in. Count to ten if 
you must. It will seem like an eternity, but letting the flustered fel¬ 
low finish is the only way he’ll hear you when it’s your turn. 

“I’m Going to Make You Miserable Before 
You Can Enjoy Being My Customer” 

Companies that run mail-order operations could take a hint from 
this technique. One reason I enjoy ordering from L.L. Bean, a 
mail-order clothing and sports-equipment outfit, is they let me ask 
questions about the wearable or widget I want first. They let me 
ramble on with my questions about the quality, the available col¬ 
ors, how it looks, how it feels, how it smells, and how it works. 
Then, when I’m all whacked up about receiving my four size-ten, 
red-and-chartreuse, soft, odorless widgets, they tastefully ask my 
credit card number. 

Other companies have first grilled me on the number, the 
expiration date, my customer number (which I can never find on 
the back of the catalogue), and how often I’ve ordered from them 
in the past before I even get to fantasize about the wonderful 
widget I might want to buy from them. Takes all the joy out of 
the purchase and sometimes kills the sale. 

Top communicators do more than just let you babble on. 
They use the next technique while you’re in the process of drib¬ 
bling down. 



#f&gt; How to lurn Their 
Anger Around (in Three 
Sentences or Less) 


Emo is a word invented by Helen Gurley Brown, the grand dame 
of Cosmopolitan magazine. Emo translated is “Give more emotion!” 
Once Cosmopolitan asked me to write an article on communicat¬ 
ing sensitive matters (most specifically advising young women on 
how to make their boyfriends more passionate). I interviewed a 
passel of psychologists, communications experts, and sexologists. 
My draft came back from Cosmo all marked up with “MORE 
EMO” scribbled on every page. 

I called my editor and asked what it meant. She said that was 
Helen’s way of saying downplay all that factual stuff with the sex 
therapists and so-called experts. Write about the emotion the young 
woman feels when her boyfriend isn’t passionate enough, the emo¬ 
tion the accused male feels when confronted, and the emotion the 
couple feels about discussing their quandary. Helen Gurley Brown, 
a certified big winner, liked to have it all and knew just how to get 
it. Helen recognized, when the time is right, reject the rational and 
empathize with the emotions. In other words, smear on the emo. 

“Oh, No! He Must Have Been Mortified!” 

L.L. Bean recently smeared emo all over me. Several months ago, 
my friend Phil wanted to buy some trousers and asked for a rec- 

522 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Turn Their Anger Around (in Three Sentences or Less) 52j 


ommendation. I dragged him to my closet to show him the qual¬ 
ity and construction of the L.L. Bean clothes. That convinced 
him, and Phil ordered a pair of navy-blue dress trousers. 

Phil wore his brand new L.L. Bean pants for the first time on 
a big date with a new girlfriend at an elegant restaurant. While 
following the maitre d’ to the cozy corner booth which he’d 
requested, his date happened to drop her evening bag. Phil 
promptly bent over to pick it up. Riiiiiiip! Right down the mid¬ 
dle seam. 

Most of the diners facing Phil’s derriere mercifully looked 
away. A few tittered. Phil, tugging the torn seams together to blan¬ 
ket his buns, backed his way into the booth. The cool upholstery 
on his bottom the rest of the evening reminded him of his 
humiliation. 

When I heard of Phil’s tribulations, I was furious at L.L. Bean. 
I immediately called one of their customer service agents. She sym¬ 
pathized as I told her of Phil’s ordeal, but I was still simmering. 
She patiently listened and even asked me details of the disaster. 
When I finished the long sad story, the agent said, “Oh that’s ter¬ 
rible. I understand, your friend must have felt awful.” 

“Yes, he did,” I agreed. 

“He must have been mortified!” she said. 

“He definitely was,” I said, surprised at her excellent grasp of 
the situation. 

“And you, when you heard about it. You must have felt terri¬ 
ble, too, especially after you’d recommended our products so 
highly.” 

“Well, your products usually are excellent,” I said, calming 
down a bit. 

“I’m so sorry we caused you this pain and aggravation,” she 

said. 

“Oh,” I interrupted. “It’s not your fault.” Now I was com¬ 
pletely appeased. “It must have just been a fluke that this one pair 
of pants was ...” 




324 How to Talk to Anyone 


2ji 


ECHNIQUE # 8 7 

Echo the Emo 


Facts speak. Emotions shout. Whenever you need facts 
from people about an emotional situation, let them 
emote. Hear their facts but empathize like mad with 
their emotions. Smearing on the emo is often the only 
way to calm their emotional storm. 


There’s more to this story, but let me pause here to interject 
the Echo the Emo technique. 

The clever customer service rep not only emptied my tanks 
and softened me up with Echo the Emo. She completely dissolved 
me with the next technique. 



88 How to Make’Em Like 
You (Even When You’ve 
Messed Up) 


The next day, UPS delivered not only the replacement slacks, but 
tucked into the package was a handwritten apology and a hefty 
gift certificate. Would I order from that company again? You bet 
I would. Would I recommend their clothes to someone else? You 
bet I would. Top customer service folks welcome mistakes because 
they know it gives their firm a chance to shine. Whene
ver you 
mess up and someone suffers because of it, make sure they come 
out ahead, way ahead. I call the technique “My Goof, Your Gain.” 

Visiting an important client’s office, I once tripped on a rug 
and took a nose dive, making a three-point landing in a vase on 
her desk. My nose was spared but her vase shattered into 
smithereens. Two tubes of crazy glue and lots of “Where the heck 
does this piece go” later, the vase was back on her desk, and we 
agreed it looked pretty good. Nevertheless, the next day I had a 
messenger deliver a beautiful vase, ten times the value of the 
almost-totaled one, with a dozen roses in it. 

Whenever we speak, my client tells me every time she looks 
at the new vase, she smiles. (A better “incentive gift” than a pen 
with your name on it, no?) The next time I visit her office, my 
client may hide some of her more valuable breakables. But, thanks 
to My Goof, Your Gain, there will be a next time. 

325 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



326 How to Talk to Anyone 


Zh 


ECHNIQUE #88 

My Goof, Your Gain 


Whenever you make a boner, make sure your victim 
benefits. It’s not enough to correct your mistake. Ask 
yourself, “What could I do for this suffering soul so he 
or she will be delighted I made the flub?” Then do it, 
fast! In that way, your goof will become your gain. 


Now, suppose it’s not your boo-boo. It’s theirs. How can you 
make their goof your gain? Read on. 




How to Trap a Rat 
with Gass 


In Japan, some citizens prefer to lose their lives rather than to lose 
face. In America, the same death wish exists, with one modifica¬ 
tion. The Yank dreams of the death of the mortal who made him 
lose face. 

Why make enemies? Unless it is your obligation to catch 
cheaters or entrap liars, let them get away with it. Then immedi¬ 
ately get them out of your life and the lives you’re responsible for. 
Even when the case is open and shut against someone—when 
you’ve got the rat fink trapped—leave him an escape hatch. 

The best example I heard of this high sensitivity was from one 
of my clients. She was invited to brunch at the home of a wealthy 
socialite known as “Lady Stephanie.” Lady Stephanie’s home was 
filled with beautiful objets d’art. Not the least among them was 
an exquisite collection of extremely valuable Eaberge eggs, which 
all the guests admired. 

At the end of the elegant champagne brunch, my client told 
me she was walking out the door chatting with several other 
guests. Just then, Lady Stephanie sidled up to one woman leaving 
at the same time as my client. “Oh, I’m so happy you were admir¬ 
ing my Eaberge collection,” Lady Stephanie said, sliding her hand 
into the pocket of the guest’s mink coat and plucking out one of 

527 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



328 How to Talk to Anyone 


her priceless eggs. “You must have wanted to see this one in the 
sunlight. Come, let us look at it together. It does reflect the bright 
light beautifully.” 

The mink-clad thief gulped and furtively looked around to 
see who had witnessed her gentle entrapment. My client and 
everyone in the foyer saw what happened, but took Lady 
Stephanie’s lead and pretended naivete of the attempted heist. 

Carrying the charade a step further, Lady Stephanie and the 
sticky-fingered guest “admired the egg in the sunlight.” Then Lady 
Stephanie, with her Faberge egg secured safely between her per¬ 
fectly manicured fingers, marched home to put the treasure in its 
rightful place. The attempted egg snatcher crawled back to her car, 
from her last attendance at Lady Stephanie’s coveted bashes. The 
hostess let the foiled filcher get away with a few slivered shreds of 
her ego left intact. 

Why did Lady Stephanie come out ahead? Everyone who wit¬ 
nessed—and subsequently heard about—the thwarted burglary 
has renewed respect for Lady Stephanie. Snaring the thief, yet 
sparing her pride, helped Lady Stephanie keep her reputation of 
“hostess with the mostest.” 

Why do big winners let bad-news people get away with bum¬ 
mers? Because, like mothers confronting naughty children to cor¬ 
rect them, confronting creeps is a way of saying “I care.” By 
closing your mouth (and then the door forever), you are saying, 
“You are so beneath me I’m not going to even waste my words on 
you.” 

“Mea Culpa!” 

Big winners leave an escape hatch for the small foibles of friends 
they wish to keep by taking the blame themselves. If a friend gets 
lost and is an hour late arriving at your house, tell her “Those 
directions I gave you were terrible.” He breaks your Limoges bowl? 
“Oh I shouldn’t have left it in such a precarious position.” It’s the 



How to Trap a Rat with Class 329 


old mea culpa routine that endears you to everyone, especially 
when they realize it wasn’t your fault. 




ECHNIQUE #89 

Leave an Escape Hatch 


Whenever you catch someone lying, filching, exagger¬ 
ating, distorting, or deceiving, don’t confront the dirty 
duck directly. Unless it is your responsibility to catch or 
correct the culprit—or unless you are saving other 
innocent victims by doing so—let the transgressor out 
of your trap with his tricky puss in one piece. Then 
resolve never to gaze upon it again. 


Residents of Toronto, Canada, have a well-earned reputation 
for grace. They demonstrated it last year in a downtown Toronto 
drugstore. A shopper attempted to stroll out through the security 
system with a purloined object in his pocket. Instead of a shrill 
alarm shattering all shoppers’ eardrums, as in many American 
cities, a tasteful little chime sounded. A charming voice came 
across the public address. “Excuse us, we have failed to inactivate 
the inventory control system. Thank you for your patience while 
you wait for a customer care representative to come help you.” Isn’t 
that a nicer way of saying “Freeze, punk, while we come frisk 
your 

Now let’s move on to the next technique to keep people from 
messing up—and to help them give you their very best. 



90 How to Get Whatever 
You Want from Service 
Personnel 


A complimentary letter is called a “buttercup” because it butters 
up the recipient. Buttercups are nice. Even nicer are buttercups 
about someone to their boss. 

I once needed a massive photocopying job. It was so immense 
that the assistant manager of Staples office-supply store didn’t 
think it could be finished by the end of the week. Nevertheless, 
grudgingly, he grumbled, “I’ll try.” In my enthusiasm and hope he 
could, I gushed, “Wow, you’re great! What’s your boss’s name? 
Your supervisor should get a letter of congratulations on hiring 
you. You really try harder for your customers.” To my astonish¬ 
ment, not only was my printing job done two days early, but every 
time I walk into Staples, the assistant manager rolls out the red 
carpet. 

“Hmm,” I began to think. “I may be on to something.” A pre¬ 
mature letter of commendation for favors not yet received could 
be a clever tactic. I decided to check it out with a few heavy hit¬ 
ters on my consultation list. 

One fellow I know, Tim, a top travel agent, is a real can-do 
guy. He gets anything his friends ask for in a finger snap. He’s the 
fellow to call when you want hard-to-get theater tickets. He’s the 


330 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Get Whatever You Want from Service Personnel 331 


guy you call when your airline says the hotel is booked or the flight 
is oversold. 

When I told him of my buttercup experience, Tim laughed 
and said, “Led, of course. This is news to you? A complimentary 
letter to someone’s boss—or the promise of one—is a great insur¬ 
ance policy. It’s as good as a written rider that you will be well 
taken care of in the future.” 

Now I have a standard one in my computer. The buttercup 
reads as follows: 

Dear [name of supervisor], 

I know how important customer service is to an 
organization such as yours. This letter is to com¬ 
mend [name of employee]. He/She is an example of 
an [employee title] who gives exceptional customer 
service. [Name of store or business] continues to 
have my business thanks in great part to the service 
given by [name of employee]. 

Gratefully, [signature] 

I’ve sent this letter to supervisors of parking lots, owners of 
insurance companies, and to managers of dozens of stores where 
I shop regularly. I’m sure that’s why I never need to worry about 
getting a parking place when the lot is full, an immediate callback 
from my insurance agent, and attentive service at my regular shop¬ 
ping haunts. 

But be careful! Don’t just ask, “What’s the name of your 
supervisor?” Hearing those words can make an employee as nerv¬ 
ous as a turkey in November. Be sure to couch it in a compliment. 
Say something like, “Wow, you are terrific. What’s your supervi¬ 
sor’s name? I’d like to write him or her a letter.” Then write it! 
You’ll forever be a VIP in his or her book. 



How to Talk to Anyone 


Zb 


EECHNIQUE #90 

Buttercups for Their Boss 


Do you have a store clerk, accountant, law firm junior 
partner, tailor, auto mechanic, maitre d’, massage 
therapist, kid’s teacher—or any other worker you want 
special attention from in the future? The surefire way 
to make them care enough to give you their very best is 
send a buttercup to their boss. 


The next technique tells you how to stand out as a VIP when 
you’re in a group. 



91 How to Be a Leader 
in a Crowd, Not a 
Follower 


During the McCarthy era, government spies infiltrated under¬ 
ground political rallies to determine who was “dangerous to 
national security.” The agents were trained applause watchers. 
They photographed and investigated men who clapped first, 
shouted “Bravo” the loudest, and smiled the longest at the end of 
politically inflammatory speeches. The spies dubbed those the 
“dangerous ones.” The infiltrators felt first responders were confi¬ 
dent cats who had the power to persuade followers and the 
charisma to lead crowds. 

In less politically sensitive gatherings, the same principle 
applies. People who respond first to a presentation or happening, 
without looking around to see how everyone else is reacting, are 
men and women of leadership caliber. 


Cool Cats Clap First 

You are sitting in an auditorium with hundreds of fellow employ¬ 
ees listening to the president of your firm introduce a new con¬ 
cept. As you’re slouching anonymously in the audience, you think 
your expression is invisible to the man or woman at the podium. 
Not so! As a speaker, I guarantee you every one of my colleagues 

did 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



334 How to Talk to Anyone 


sees every smile, every frown, every light in every eye, and every 
emblem of extraordinary human intelligence flashing back at him 
or her. 

Likewise, the company president making a presentation anx¬ 
iously surveys his corporate jungle and, from the pusses peering 
back at him, senses which employees are sympathetic and which 
are not. He also knows which in the sea of faces floating in front 
of him has the potential to be a heavy hitter like himself. How? 

Because heavy hitters, even when they do not agree with the 
speaker, support the podium pontificator. Why? Because they 
know what it’s like to be on. They know, no matter how big or lit¬ 
tle the cat at the front of the room is, when giving a speech he’s 
concerned about the crowd’s acceptance. 


.'r. 


ECHNIQUE #91 

Lead the Listeners 


No matter how prominent the big cat behind the 
podium is, crouched inside is a little scaredy-cat who is 
anxious about the crowd’s acceptance. 

Big winners recognize you’re a fellow big winner 
when they see you leading their listeners in a positive 
reaction. Be th z first to applaud or publicly commend 
the man or woman you agree with (or want favors 
from). 


When the company big shot delivers his last line, carefully 
contrived to bring the crowd to its feet or employees to acquies¬ 
cence, do you think he’s unaware of who starts the trickle, or the 
riptide, of acceptance? No way! Though his head is down while 
taking a bow, with the insight of a McCarthy-era spy, he perceives 



How to Be a Leader in a Crowd, Not a Follower 33$ 


precisely who inaugurated the applause, precisely how long after 
the last words were uttered, and precisely how enthusiastically! 
Being the first to put your hands together, being the first to jump 
to your feet, and, if appropriate, being the first to shout “Bravo,” 
gets you big cat status with the tiger who was talking. 

Be the first clapper no matter how small the crowd, no mat¬ 
ter how informal the talk. Don’t wait to see how everyone else is 
going to respond. Even if it’s a small group of three or four peo¬ 
ple standing around, be the first to empathize with the speaker’s 
ideas, the first to mutter “good idea.” It’s proof positive you’re a 
person who trusts his or her own instincts. 




How to Make All 
the Right Moves 


Any minute, any second, football fans know the score. Even beer- 
guzzling Big George, dozing in front of the TV set on football 
Sunday knows. Poke his pudgy pot, and in a wink, he’ll tell you 
who’s winning, who’s losing, and by precisely how many points. 

Key players in the game of life are like George. Even when 
you think they’re dozing, they are constantly aware of the score 
between themselves and everyone in their life—friends and fam¬ 
ily included! They know who is winning, who is losing, and by 
how many points. 

When two Japanese businessmen meet, it’s obvious who is on 
top. You measure it in millimeters from how close to the floor their 
noses come when bowing. (Bottom man’s nose dives lower.) 

In America, we don’t have carefully choreographed bows 
showing the score in a relationship. But boys ’n’ girls in the busi¬ 
ness big league know who is top dog and who is bottom dog today. 
(It can change tomorrow.) 

Bottom dog must curtsy deeper. He or she must show defer¬ 
ence. Bottom dog must offer to meet at top dog’s office, pick up 
the restaurant tab when appropriate, and be respectful of top dog’s 
time. If bottom dog fails to show the proper deference, he doesn’t 

336 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



How to Make All the Right Moves JJ7 


get his nose rubbed into the ground. He simply disqualifies him¬ 
self to bark in the big league. 

That’s what happened to my girlfriend Laura, who had devel¬ 
oped the healthy milkshake. (Remember her from Instant Replay?) 
When we last left Laura, she was blowing her chances with Fred, 
the top banana of a supermarket chain, by grilling him for details 
of his mailing address, complaining her pen was out of ink, mak¬ 
ing him wait while she got another, writing numbers down wrong, 
ad nauseam. 

I didn’t tell you the worst part. After Fred was generous 
enough to invite Laura to send him samples of her health shake, 
she dropped another bomb by asking him which shipping service 
she should use. He must have said FedEx because I heard Laura 
say, “Well, my milkshake needs to stay refrigerated. Does FedEx 
have refrigerated trucks?” 

At this point I knew she had strangled the deal by her own 
phone chord. She shouldn’t nudge Supermarket Czar with dinky 
shipping details. In fact, Laura should be so grateful, she should 
personally deliver the drink the next day—rolling it all the way to 
his supermarket with her nose if need be. Laura was obviously not 
aware of The Great Scorecard in the Sky. That day the tally was 
Fred everything, Laura nothing. 

Big winners—before putting pen to paper, fingers to key¬ 
board, mouth to phone, or hand to someone else’s to shake it— 
do a quick calculation. They ask themselves “Who has the most 
to benefit from this relationship? What has each of us done 
recently that demands deference from the other?” And what can 
I do to even the score? 


Friends Keep Tabs Too 

The Great Scorecard in the Sky is not just bobbing over busi¬ 
nesspeople. If family members and friends look carefully over their 



338 How to Talk to Anyone 


loved ones’ heads, they’ll spot it. And, like an over-the-counter 
stock, it goes up or down every day. When you mess up, you have 
to even your score by doing more for the one who didn’t. To keep 
love alive, keep your eye on The Great Scorecard in the Sky. 

Several months ago, I met a nice chap named Charles at a con¬ 
vention. We started discussing our favorite foods. His was home¬ 
made linguine with pesto sauce. I liked Charles and I make a mean 
pesto sauce. The remarkable coincidence of these two elements 
emboldened me to invite him to dinner at my place. “Great,” he 
said. We set it for seven-thirty the following Tuesday. 

Tuesday afternoon, I begin preparations for the big date. The 
cuckoo clock on the wall monitored my progress. At five cuckoos, 
I run to the store to find pine nuts. By six cuckoos, I’m back home 
grinding basil and garlic. At seven cuckoos, I’m folding napkins, 
setting the table, pulling out fresh candles. Whoops, running late. 
I change clothes and spruce myself up. When seven-thirty strikes, 
I am all ready. The pesto and I await his arrival. 

Eight o’clock rolls around and no friend. Well, I figure, I’ll 
open the wine and let it breathe. Another hour passes and no 
Charles. The cuckoo calls me “cuckoo” nine times now. I begin to 
believe the bird. It is evident Charles isn’t coming. I have been 
stood up. 

The next day Charles called with halfhearted apologies and a 
semiplausible excuse. His car broke down. “Gee, I’m sorry,” I said. 
(I wanted to say, “Did Martians capture you? Were you trans¬ 
ported to another planet where there were no phones to call me?” 
I resisted the sarcasm.) However, he did sound contrite so I was 
almost willing to forget it. Until his next question. 

He obviously wasn’t aware of how he’d slipped in The Great 
Scorecard in the Sky because, instead of inviting me for linguine 
with pesto at a fine Italian restaurant to make up for his blooper, 
he asked, “When can we reschedule at your house?” 

Never, Charlie. 



How to Make All the Right Moves 339 




ECHNIQUE #92 

The Great Scorecard in the Sky 


Any two people have an invisible scorecard hovering 
above their heads. The numbers continually fluctuate, 
but one rule remains: player with lower score pays 
deference to player with higher score. The penalty for 
not keeping your eye on The Great Scorecard in the 
Sky is to be thrown out of the game. Permanently. 


Your Destiny 

We’ve met many people in How to Talk to Anyone. A few of their 
names are changed, but each is very real. Recently, I decided to 
track down some of the folks with whom I’d crossed paths over 
the years. I wanted to see what they’re up to now. 

Laura, my old friend who dreamed of milkshake millions but 
ignored the Supermarket Czar’s scorecard, is now back at her day 
job. Sam, who ruffled me by not revealing he wanted me to speak 
for his organization, no longer has one. Sonny, who hounded his 
brother-in-law’s cousin by a too-quick call, is still pumping gas. 
Tania, who insisted on immediate tit for tat, no longer has that 
terrific job at the talent agency. Poor Jane, the mail-room clerk who 
confronted her boss at the Christmas party five years ago, is still 
wrapping packages. And Dan, who left the prolonged inspirational 
message on his phone, now has an unlisted number—not a good 
sign for an aspiring speaker. 

Whereas Barry who asks everyone he calls, “What Color Is 
Your Time?” was recently chosen Broadcaster of the Year by the 
National Association of Talk Show Hosts. Joe, who keeps note of 
everyone on his Business Card Dossier, is now a state senator. 



540 How to Talk to Anyone 


Jimmi, the expert at Eyeball Selling, was recently written up in 
Success magazine. Steve, whose staff insinuates “Oh Wow, It’s You!” 
to every caller, is one of the most requested speakers on the cable 
circuit. Tim, the can-do guy who gets what he wants from work¬ 
ers in every industry by writing Buttercups for Their Boss, now 
owns the travel agency. And Gloria, my hairdresser who gives the 
great Nutshell Resume, recently opened a salon on New York’s 
fashionable Fifth Avenue. 

Does this mean to say that just because the first folks irked 
me and a few others they were exiled to a humdrum existence? 
And the latter group who made people smile would attain great 
heights? Of course not. Those isolated moments of their lives we 
examined were but one move of many they made each day. 

But consider: if you had been who was ruffled by Laura, Sam, 
Sonny, Tania, Jane, or Dan and they called you, would you feel 
like extending yourself for them? Probably not. The memory of 
their ragged dealing would still smart. 

Whereas if you heard from Barry, Joe, Jimmi, Steve, Tim, or 
Gloria, happy memories of your exchange would flood over you. 
You’d want to do whatever you could for them. 

Multiply your response by many thousands. As we said in the 
introduction, nobody gets to the top alone. Over the years, the 
smooth moves of these big winners have captured the hearts and 
conquered the minds of hundreds of people who helped boost 
them rung by rung to the top of whatever ladder they chose. 

How does one become an instinctive smooth mover rather 
than a ragged rider through life? The answer became blindingly 
clear one snowy day last winter. Lumbering along a neatly 
groomed track on cross-country skis, I spotted a Nordic skier 
swiftly striding toward me in the same trail. I didn’t need to 
observe his high kick or his snazzy diagonal poling to let me know 
I was obstructing the path of a pro. 



How to Make All the Right Moves 341 


While mustering the energy to lug my throbbing legs out of 
the track so Super Skier could soar past, he deftly sidestepped out 
of the groove, leaving the groomed trail all for me. As he whizzed 
toward me, he slowed slightly, smiled, nodded, and said, “Good 
morning, beautiful day for skiing, isn’t it?” 

I appreciated his deference (and insinuation that we were 
equals on the snow!). I knew he was not thinking “Hey look at 
me. Here I am!” but “Ahh, there you are. Let me make room for 
you.” 

As I implied in the opening words of this book, the differ¬ 
ence in the life success between those two types of thinkers is 
incalculable. 

Why was Super Skier able to pull off his move so gracefully? 
Was he born with the skill? No. His was a deliberate move that 
grew out of practice. 

Practice is also the fountainhead of all smooth communica¬ 
tions moves. Excellence is not a single and solitary action. It is the 
outcome of many years of making small smooth moves, tiny ones 
like the ninety-two little tricks we’ve explored in How to Talk to 
Anyone. These moves create your destiny. 

Remember, repeating an action makes a habit. 

Your habits create your character. 

And your character is your destiny. 

May success be your destiny. 



This page intentionally left blank. 



Notes 


1. Ekman, Paul. 1985. Telling Lies: Clues to Deceit in the Mar¬ 
ketplace, Politics, and Marriage. New York: W. W. Norton Co., Inc. 

2. Cheng, Sha, et al. 1990. “Effects of Personality Type on 
Stress Response.” Acta-Psychologica-Sinica 22(2):i97-204. 

3. Carnegie, Dale. 1936. How to Win Friends and Influence Peo¬ 
ple. New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. 

4. Goleman, Daniel. 1989. “Brain’s Design Emerges as a Key 
to Emotions,” quoting Dr. Joseph LeDoux, psychologist at Cen¬ 
ter for Neural Science at New York University. New York Times, 
August 15. 

5. Kellerman, Joan, et al. 1989. “Looking and Loving: The 
Effects of Mutual Gaze on Feelings of Romantic Love.” Con¬ 
ducted at the Agoraphobia Treatment &amp; Research Center of New 
England. Journal of Research in Personality 23 (2): 145-161. 

6. Argyle, Michael. 1967. The Psychology of Interpersonal 
Behavior. Baltimore: Pelican Publications. 

7. Wellens, A. Rodney. 1987. “Heart-Rate Changes in Re¬ 
sponse to Shifts in Interpersonal Gaze from Liked and Disliked 
Others.” Perceptual and Motor Skills 64(2): 595-598. 

8. Ibid. 


343 

Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 



344 Notes 


9. Zig Ziglar, motivational teacher and author of the best¬ 
selling books See You at the Top, Secrets of Closing the Sale, Over 
the Top, and Something to Smile About. 

10. Curtis, Rebecca C., and Miller, Kim. 1986. “Believing 
Another Likes or Dislikes You: Behaviors Making the Beliefs Come 
Tru c.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 5i(2):284-290. 

11. Hayakawa, S. I. 1941. Language in Thought and Action. 
New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. 

12. Aronson, E., et al. 1966. “The Effect of a Pratfall on 
Increasing Interpersonal Attractiveness.” Psychonomic Science 
4:227-228. 

13. Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching 
and Carnegie Institute of Technology studies in the 1930s show¬ 
ing that 85 percent of one’s financial success, even in technical 
fields such as engineering, is due to communications skills. 

14. U.S. Census Bureau of Hiring, Training, and Manage¬ 
ment Practices conducted a survey of 3,000 employers nation¬ 
wide. The preferred qualities in job candidates were, rated in order 
of importance, attitude, communications skills, previous work 
experience, recommendations from current employer, recom¬ 
mendations from previous employer, industry-based credentials, 
years of schooling completed, score on interview tests, academic 
performance (grades), reputation of applicant’s school, teacher 
recommendations. 

15. Walsh, Debra G., and Hewitt, Jay. 1985. “Giving Men the 
Come-On: Effect of Eye Contact and Smiling in a Bar Environ¬ 
ment.” Perceptual and Motor Skills 61(3, Part 1): 873-874. 

16. Walters, Lilly. 1995. What to Say When You’re Dying on the 
Platform. New York: McGraw-Hill. 

17. Axtell, Roger. 1994. Do’s and Taboos Around the World. New 
York: John Wiley &amp; Sons, Inc. 

18. Bosrock, Mary. 1997. Put Your Best Foot Forward series. 
Minneapolis: International Education Systems. 



Notes 345 


19. Nwanna, Gladson. 1998. Do’s and Don’ts Around the 
World series. Baltimore: World Travel Institute. 

20. Byrne, Donn, et al. 1970. “Continuity Between the Exper¬ 
imental Study of Attraction and Real-Life Computer Dating.” 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 1:157-165. 

21. Fast, Julius. 1970. Body Language. New York: Simon &amp; 
Schuster. 

22. Fast, Julius. 1991. Subtext: Making Body Language Work in 
the Workplace. New York: Viking. 

23. Lewis, David. 1989. The Secret Language of Success. New 
York: Carroll &amp; Graf Publishers, Inc. 

24. Nierenberg, Gerard, and Caliero, Fdenry. 1993. How to 
Read a Person Like a Book. New York: Barnes &amp; Noble Books. 

25. Pease, Allan. 1981. Signals: How to Use Body Language for 
Power, Success and Love. New York: Bantam Books. 

26. Sannito, Thomas, and McGovern, Peter J., 1985. Court¬ 
room Psychology for Trial Lawyers. New York: John Wiley &amp; Sons, 
Inc. 



This page intentionally left blank. 



About the Author 


Leil Lowndes is an internationally acclaimed communications 
expert who coaches top executives of Fortune 500 companies as 
well as frontline employees to become more effective communi¬ 
cators. She has spoken in pratically every major U.S. city and con¬ 
ducts communications seminars for the U.S. Peace Corps, foreign 
governments, and major corporations. In addition to engrossing 
audiences on hundreds of TV and radio shows, her work has been 
acclaimed by the New York Times, the Chicago Tribune, and Time 
magazine. Her articles have appeared in professional journals and 
popular publications such as Redbook, New Woman, Psychology 
Today, Penthouse, and Cosmopolitan. Based in New York City, she 
is the author of many books including the topselling How to Make 
Anyone Fall in Love with You and How to Be a People Magnet. 

If you come across any communications techniques, send 
them to Leil—so she can share them with others. She would love 
to hear from you. Her E-mail address is leil@peoplemagnet.com. 

Would you like more communications techniques from Leil? 
Sign up for her complimentary monthly communications hint. 
Go to lowndes.com and click on “Subscribe.” 


Copyright 2003 by Leil Lowndes. Click Here for Terms of Use. 





Tiny Changes, 


Remarkable Results 


An Easy & simple guide, Proven Way to 


Build Good Habits &amp; Break Bad Ones 


James Clear 



ATOMIC 
HABITS 


An Easy simple guide, Proven Way 
to Build Good Habits &amp; 
Break Bad Ones 


JAMES CLEAR 


Tiny Changes, 
Remarkable 
Results 


AVERY 
an imprint of Penguin Random House 


New York 


AVERY 
AN IMPRINT OF PENGUIN RANDOM HOUSE LLC 


375 Hudson Street 
New York, New York 10014 


Copyright © 2018 by James Clear 
Penguin supports copyright. Copyright fuels creativity, encourages diverse voices, promotes free speech, and creates a vibrant culture. Thank you for buying an authorized edition of this book and for 
complying with copyright laws by not reproducing, scanning, or distributing any part of it in any form without permission. You are supporting writers and allowing Penguin to continue to publish books 
for every reader. 


Ebook ISBN 9780735211308 


While the author has made every effort to provide accurate Internet addresses at the time of publication, neither the publisher nor the author assumes any responsibility for errors, or for changes that occur 
after publication. Further, the publisher does not have any control over and does not assume any responsibility for author or third-party websites or their content. 


Version_1 


atomic 


ə'tämik 
an extremely small amount of a thing; the single irreducible unit of a larger system. 


the source of immense energy or power. 


habit 


'habət 


a routine or practice performed regularly; an automatic response to a specific situation. 


Contents 


Title Page 

Copyright 

Epigraph 

Introduction: My Story 


The Fundamentals 
Why Tiny Changes Make a Big Difference 


1 The Surprising Power of Atomic Habits 





2 How Your Habits Shape Your Identity (and Vice Versa) 





3 How to Build Better Habits in 4 Simple Steps 





The 1st Law 
Make It Obvious 


4 The Man Who Didn’t Look Right 





5 The Best Way to Start a New Habit 





6 Motivation Is Overrated; Environment Often Matters More 





7 The Secret to Self-Control 


The 2nd Law 
Make It Attractive 


8 How to Make a Habit Irresistible 





9 The Role of Family and Friends in Shaping Your Habits 





10 How to Find and Fix the Causes of Your Bad Habits 





The 3rd Law 
Make It Easy 


11 Walk Slowly, but Never Backward 





12 The Law of Least Effort 


13 How to Stop Procrastinating by Using the Two-Minute Rule 





14 How to Make Good Habits Inevitable and Bad Habits Impossible 








he Cardinal Rule of Behavior Change 





16 How to Stick with Good Habits Every Day 





17 How an Accountability Partner Can Change Everything 








18 The Truth About Talent (When Genes Matter and When They Don’t) 





19 The Goldilocks Rule: How to Stay Motivated in Life and Work 





20 The Downside of Creating Good Habits 





Conclusion: The Secret to Results That Last 












Little Lessons from the Four Law: 
How to Apply These Ideas to Bu 
How to Apply These Ideas to Parenting 



























Advanced Tactics 
; act 


Appendix 


Introduction 


My Story 


O... sna. day of my sophomore year of high school, I was hit in the face with a 


baseball bat. As my classmate took a full swing, the bat slipped out of his hands 
and came flying toward me before striking me directly between the eyes. I have 
no memory of the moment of impact. 

The bat smashed into my face with such force that it crushed my nose into a 
distorted U-shape. The collision sent the soft tissue of my brain slamming into 
the inside of my skull. Immediately, a wave of swelling surged throughout my 
head. In a fraction of a second, I had a broken nose, multiple skull fractures, and 
two shattered eye sockets. 

When I opened my eyes, I saw people staring at me and running over to help. 
I looked down and noticed spots of red on my clothes. One of my classmates 
took the shirt off his back and handed it to me. I used it to plug the stream of 
blood rushing from my broken nose. Shocked and confused, I was unaware of 
how seriously I had been injured. 

My teacher looped his arm around my shoulder and we began the long walk to 
the nurse’s office: across the field, down the hill, and back into school. Random 
hands touched my sides, holding me upright. We took our time and walked 
slowly. Nobody realized that every minute mattered. 

When we arrived at the nurse’s office, she asked me a series of questions. 

“What year is it?” 

“1998,” I answered. It was actually 2002. 

“Who is the president of the United States?” 

“Bill Clinton,” I said. The correct answer was George W. Bush. 

“What is your mom’s name?” 

“Uh. Um.” I stalled. Ten seconds passed. 

“Patti,” I said casually, ignoring the fact that it had taken me ten seconds to 
remember my own mother’s name. 

That is the last question I remember. My body was unable to handle the rapid 
swelling in my brain and I lost consciousness before the ambulance arrived. 
Minutes later, I was carried out of school and taken to the local hospital. 

Shortly after arriving, my body began shutting down. I struggled with basic 
functions like swallowing and breathing. I had my first seizure of the day. Then I 


stopped breathing entirely. As the doctors hurried to supply me with oxygen, 
they also decided the local hospital was unequipped to handle the situation and 
ordered a helicopter to fly me to a larger hospital in Cincinnati. 

I was rolled out of the emergency room doors and toward the helipad across 
the street. The stretcher rattled on a bumpy sidewalk as one nurse pushed me 
along while another pumped each breath into me by hand. My mother, who had 
arrived at the hospital a few moments before, climbed into the helicopter beside 
me. I remained unconscious and unable to breathe on my own as she held my 
hand during the flight. 

While my mother rode with me in the helicopter, my father went home to 
check on my brother and sister and break the news to them. He choked back 
tears as he explained to my sister that he would miss her eighth-grade graduation 
ceremony that night. After passing my siblings off to family and friends, he 
drove to Cincinnati to meet my mother. 

When my mom and I landed on the roof of the hospital, a team of nearly 
twenty doctors and nurses sprinted onto the helipad and wheeled me into the 
trauma unit. By this time, the swelling in my brain had become so severe that I 
was having repeated post-traumatic seizures. My broken bones needed to be 
fixed, but I was in no condition to undergo surgery. After yet another seizure— 
my third of the day—I was put into a medically induced coma and placed on a 
ventilator. 

My parents were no strangers to this hospital. Ten years earlier, they had 
entered the same building on the ground floor after my sister was diagnosed with 
leukemia at age three. I was five at the time. My brother was just six months old. 
After two and a half years of chemotherapy treatments, spinal taps, and bone 
marrow biopsies, my little sister finally walked out of the hospital happy, 
healthy, and cancer free. And now, after ten years of normal life, my parents 
found themselves back in the same place with a different child. 

While I slipped into a coma, the hospital sent a priest and a social worker to 
comfort my parents. It was the same priest who had met with them a decade 
earlier on the evening they found out my sister had cancer. 

As day faded into night, a series of machines kept me alive. My parents slept 
restlessly on a hospital mattress—one moment they would collapse from fatigue, 
the next they would be wide awake with worry. My mother would tell me later, 
“Tt was one of the worst nights I’ve ever had.” 


MY RECOVERY 


Mercifully, by the next morning my breathing had rebounded to the point where 
the doctors felt comfortable releasing me from the coma. When I finally 
regained consciousness, I discovered that I had lost my ability to smell. As a test, 
a nurse asked me to blow my nose and sniff an apple juice box. My sense of 
smell returned, but—to everyone’s surprise—the act of blowing my nose forced 
air through the fractures in my eye socket and pushed my left eye outward. My 
eyeball bulged out of the socket, held precariously in place by my eyelid and the 
optic nerve attaching my eye to my brain. 

The ophthalmologist said my eye would gradually slide back into place as the 
air seeped out, but it was hard to tell how long this would take. I was scheduled 
for surgery one week later, which would allow me some additional time to heal. 
I looked like I had been on the wrong end of a boxing match, but I was cleared 
to leave the hospital. I returned home with a broken nose, half a dozen facial 
fractures, and a bulging left eye. 

The following months were hard. It felt like everything in my life was on 
pause. I had double vision for weeks; I literally couldn’t see straight. It took 
more than a month, but my eyeball did eventually return to its normal location. 
Between the seizures and my vision problems, it was eight months before I could 
drive a car again. At physical therapy, I practiced basic motor patterns like 
walking in a straight line. I was determined not to let my injury get me down, but 
there were more than a few moments when I felt depressed and overwhelmed. 

I became painfully aware of how far I had to go when I returned to the 
baseball field one year later. Baseball had always been a major part of my life. 
My dad had played minor league baseball for the St. Louis Cardinals, and I had a 
dream of playing professionally, too. After months of rehabilitation, what I 
wanted more than anything was to get back on the field. 

But my return to baseball was not smooth. When the season rolled around, I 
was the only junior to be cut from the varsity baseball team. I was sent down to 
play with the sophomores on junior varsity. I had been playing since age four, 
and for someone who had spent so much time and effort on the sport, getting cut 
was humiliating. I vividly remember the day it happened. I sat in my car and 
cried as I flipped through the radio, desperately searching for a song that would 
make me feel better. 

After a year of self-doubt, I managed to make the varsity team as a senior, but 
I rarely made it on the field. In total, I played eleven innings of high school 
varsity baseball, barely more than a single game. 

Despite my lackluster high school career, I still believed I could become a 
great player. And I knew that if things were going to improve, I was the one 
responsible for making it happen. The turning point came two years after my 


injury, when I began college at Denison University. It was a new beginning, and 
it was the place where I would discover the surprising power of small habits for 
the first time. 


HOW I LEARNED ABOUT HABITS 


Attending Denison was one of the best decisions of my life. I earned a spot on 
the baseball team and, although I was at the bottom of the roster as a freshman, I 
was thrilled. Despite the chaos of my high school years, I had managed to 
become a college athlete. 

I wasn’t going to be starting on the baseball team anytime soon, so I focused 
on getting my life in order. While my peers stayed up late and played video 
games, I built good sleep habits and went to bed early each night. In the messy 
world of a college dorm, I made a point to keep my room neat and tidy. These 
improvements were minor, but they gave me a sense of control over my life. I 
started to feel confident again. And this growing belief in myself rippled into the 
classroom as I improved my study habits and managed to earn straight A’s 
during my first year. 

A habit is a routine or behavior that is performed regularly—and, in many 
cases, automatically. As each semester passed, I accumulated small but 
consistent habits that ultimately led to results that were unimaginable to me 
when I started. For example, for the first time in my life, I made it a habit to lift 
weights multiple times per week, and in the years that followed, my six-foot- 
four-inch frame bulked up from a featherweight 170 to a lean 200 pounds. 

When my sophomore season arrived, I earned a starting role on the pitching 
staff. By my junior year, I was voted team captain and at the end of the season, I 
was selected for the all-conference team. But it was not until my senior season 
that my sleep habits, study habits, and strength-training habits really began to 
pay off. 

Six years after I had been hit in the face with a baseball bat, flown to the 
hospital, and placed into a coma, I was selected as the top male athlete at 
Denison University and named to the ESPN Academic All-America Team—an 
honor given to just thirty-three players across the country. By the time I 
graduated, I was listed in the school record books in eight different categories. 
That same year, I was awarded the university’s highest academic honor, the 
President’s Medal. 

I hope you’ll forgive me if this sounds boastful. To be honest, there was 
nothing legendary or historic about my athletic career. I never ended up playing 


professionally. However, looking back on those years, I believe I accomplished 
something just as rare: I fulfilled my potential. And I believe the concepts in this 
book can help you fulfill your potential as well. 

We all face challenges in life. This injury was one of mine, and the experience 
taught me a critical lesson: changes that seem small and unimportant at first will 
compound into remarkable results if you’re willing to stick with them for years. 
We all deal with setbacks but in the long run, the quality of our lives often 
depends on the quality of our habits. With the same habits, you’ll end up with 
the same results. But with better habits, anything is possible. 

Maybe there are people who can achieve incredible success overnight. I don’t 
know any of them, and I’m certainly not one of them. There wasn’t one defining 
moment on my journey from medically induced coma to Academic All- 
American; there were many. It was a gradual evolution, a long series of small 
wins and tiny breakthroughs. The only way I made progress—the only choice I 
had—was to start small. And I employed this same strategy a few years later 
when I started my own business and began working on this book. 


HOW AND WHY I WROTE THIS BOOK 


In November 2012, I began publishing articles at jamesclear.com. For years, I 
had been keeping notes about my personal experiments with habits and I was 
finally ready to share some of them publicly. I began by publishing a new article 
every Monday and Thursday. Within a few months, this simple writing habit led 
to my first one thousand email subscribers, and by the end of 2013 that number 
had grown to more than thirty thousand people. 

In 2014, my email list expanded to over one hundred thousand subscribers, 
which made it one of the fastest-growing newsletters on the internet. I had felt 
like an impostor when I began writing two years earlier, but now I was 
becoming known as an expert on habits—a new label that excited me but also 
felt uncomfortable. I had never considered myself a master of the topic, but 
rather someone who was experimenting alongside my readers. 

In 2015, I reached two hundred thousand email subscribers and signed a book 
deal with Penguin Random House to begin writing the book you are reading 
now. As my audience grew, so did my business opportunities. I was increasingly 
asked to speak at top companies about the science of habit formation, behavior 
change, and continuous improvement. I found myself delivering keynote 
speeches at conferences in the United States and Europe. 

In 2016, my articles began to appear regularly in major publications like Time, 


Entrepreneur, and Forbes. Incredibly, my writing was read by over eight million 
people that year. Coaches in the NFL, NBA, and MLB began reading my work 
and sharing it with their teams. 

At the start of 2017, I launched the Habits Academy, which became the 
premier training platform for organizations and individuals interested in building 
better habits in life and work.* Fortune 500 companies and growing start-ups 
began to enroll their leaders and train their staff. In total, over ten thousand 
leaders, managers, coaches, and teachers have graduated from the Habits 
Academy, and my work with them has taught me an incredible amount about 
what it takes to make habits work in the real world. 

As I put the finishing touches on this book in 2018, jamesclear.com is 
receiving millions of visitors per month and nearly five hundred thousand people 
subscribe to my weekly email newsletter—a number that is so far beyond my 
expectations when I began that I’m not even sure what to think of it. 


HOW THIS BOOK WILL BENEFIT YOU 


The entrepreneur and investor Naval Ravikant has said, “To write a great book, 
you must first become the book.” I originally learned about the ideas mentioned 
here because I had to live them. I had to rely on small habits to rebound from my 
injury, to get stronger in the gym, to perform at a high level on the field, to 
become a writer, to build a successful business, and simply to develop into a 
responsible adult. Small habits helped me fulfill my potential, and since you 
picked up this book, I’m guessing you’d like to fulfill yours as well. 

In the pages that follow, I will share a step-by-step plan for building better 
habits—not for days or weeks, but for a lifetime. While science supports 
everything I’ve written, this book is not an academic research paper; it’s an 
operating manual. You’ll find wisdom and practical advice front and center as I 
explain the science of how to create and change your habits in a way that is easy 
to understand and apply. 

The fields I draw on—biology, neuroscience, philosophy, psychology, and 
more—have been around for many years. What I offer you is a synthesis of the 
best ideas smart people figured out a long time ago as well as the most 
compelling discoveries scientists have made recently. My contribution, I hope, is 
to find the ideas that matter most and connect them in a way that is highly 
actionable. Anything wise in these pages you should credit to the many experts 
who preceded me. Anything foolish, assume it is my error. 

The backbone of this book is my four-step model of habits—cue, craving, 


response, and reward—and the four laws of behavior change that evolve out of 
these steps. Readers with a psychology background may recognize some of these 
terms from operant conditioning, which was first proposed as “stimulus, 
response, reward” by B. F. Skinner in the 1930s and has been popularized more 
recently as “cue, routine, reward” in The Power of Habit by Charles Duhigg. 

Behavioral scientists like Skinner realized that if you offered the right reward 
or punishment, you could get people to act in a certain way. But while Skinner’s 
model did an excellent job of explaining how external stimuli influenced our 
habits, it lacked a good explanation for how our thoughts, feelings, and beliefs 
impact our behavior. Internal states—our moods and emotions—matter, too. In 
recent decades, scientists have begun to determine the connection between our 
thoughts, feelings, and behavior. This research will also be covered in these 
pages. 

In total, the framework I offer is an integrated model of the cognitive and 
behavioral sciences. I believe it is one of the first models of human behavior to 
accurately account for both the influence of external stimuli and internal 
emotions on our habits. While some of the language may be familiar, I am 
confident that the details—and the applications of the Four Laws of Behavior 
Change—will offer a new way to think about your habits. 

Human behavior is always changing: situation to situation, moment to 
moment, second to second. But this book is about what doesn’t change. It’s 
about the fundamentals of human behavior. The lasting principles you can rely 
on year after year. The ideas you can build a business around, build a family 
around, build a life around. 

There is no one right way to create better habits, but this book describes the 
best way I know—an approach that will be effective regardless of where you 
start or what you’re trying to change. The strategies I cover will be relevant to 
anyone looking for a step-by-step system for improvement, whether your goals 
center on health, money, productivity, relationships, or all of the above. As long 
as human behavior is involved, this book will be your guide. 


THE 
FUNDAMENTALS 


Why Tiny Changes Make a Big Difference 


1 


The Surprising Power of Atomic Habits 


T. rare or British Cycling changed one day in 2003. The organization, which was 


the governing body for professional cycling in Great Britain, had recently hired 
Dave Brailsford as its new performance director. At the time, professional 
cyclists in Great Britain had endured nearly one hundred years of mediocrity. 
Since 1908, British riders had won just a single gold medal at the Olympic 
Games, and they had fared even worse in cycling’s biggest race, the Tour de 
France. In 110 years, no British cyclist had ever won the event. 

In fact, the performance of British riders had been so underwhelming that one 
of the top bike manufacturers in Europe refused to sell bikes to the team because 
they were afraid that it would hurt sales if other professionals saw the Brits using 
their gear. 

Brailsford had been hired to put British Cycling on a new trajectory. What 
made him different from previous coaches was his relentless commitment to a 
strategy that he referred to as ‘GH@@SSresatiGnGhimiarsinal\sains” which was the 
philosophy of searching for a tiny margin of improvement in everything you do. 
Brailsford said, “The whole principle came from the idea that if you broke down 
everything you could think of that goes into riding a bike, and then improve it by 
1 percent, you will get a significant increase when you put them all together.” 

Brailsford and his coaches began by making small adjustments you might 
expect from a professional cycling team. They redesigned the bike seats to make 
them more comfortable and rubbed alcohol on the tires for a better grip. They 
asked riders to wear electrically heated overshorts to maintain ideal muscle 
temperature while riding and used biofeedback sensors to monitor how each 
athlete responded to a particular workout. The team tested various fabrics in a 
wind tunnel and had their outdoor riders switch to indoor racing suits, which 
proved to be lighter and more aerodynamic. 

But they didn’t stop there. Brailsford and his team continued to find 1 percent 


improvements in overlooked and unexpected areas. They tested different types 
of massage gels to see which one led to the fastest muscle recovery. They hired a 
surgeon to teach each rider the best way to wash their hands to reduce the 
chances of catching a cold. They determined the type of pillow and mattress that 
led to the best night’s sleep for each rider. They even painted the inside of the 
team truck white, which helped them spot little bits of dust that would normally 
slip by unnoticed but could degrade the performance of the finely tuned bikes. 

As these and hundreds of other small improvements accumulated, the results 
came faster than anyone could have imagined. 

Just five years after Brailsford took over, the British Cycling team dominated 
the road and track cycling events at the 2008 Olympic Games in Beijing, where 
they won an astounding 60 percent of the gold medals available. Four years 
later, when the Olympic Games came to London, the Brits raised the bar as they 
set nine Olympic records and seven world records. 

That same year, Bradley Wiggins became the first British cyclist to win the 
Tour de France. The next year, his teammate Chris Froome won the race, and he 
would go on to win again in 2015, 2016, and 2017, giving the British team five 
Tour de France victories in six years. 

During the ten-year span from 2007 to 2017, British cyclists won 178 world 
championships and sixty-six Olympic or Paralympic gold medals and captured 
five Tour de France victories in what is widely regarded as the most successful 
run in cycling history.* 

How does this happen? How does a team of previously ordinary athletes 
transform into world champions with tiny changes that, at first glance, would 
seem to make a modest difference at best? Why do small improvements 
accumulate into such remarkable results, and how can you replicate this 
approach in your own life? 


It is so easy to overestimate the importance of one defining moment and 
underestimate the value of making small improvements on a daily basis. Too 
often, we convince ourselves that massive success requires massive action. 
Whether it is losing weight, building a business, writing a book, winning a 


championship, or achieving any other goal, we put pressure on ourselves £0) 
make some earth-shattering improvement that everyone will talk about. 


Meanwhile, improving by 1 percent isn’t particularly notable—sometimes it 


isn’t even noticeable—but it can be far More meaningful, especially in the long 








fun. The difference a tiny improvement can make over time is astounding. 


Here’s how the math works out: if you Canigetillipercent\better gaui day forvone 










Conversely, if you get 1 percent worse each day for one year, you’ll decline 
nearly down to zero. What starts as a small win or a minor setback accumulates 
into something much more. 


1% BETTER EVERY DAY 


1% worse every day for one year. 0.99365 = 00.03 


1% better every day for one year. 1.01365 = 37.78 


RESULTS 


1% IMPROVEMENT 


1% DECLINE 


TIME 


FIGURE 1: The effects of small habits compound over time. For example, if you can get just 1 percent better each day, you’ll end up with results that are nearly 37 times better after one 
year. 


Habits are the compound interest of selfimprovement. The same way that 
money multiplies through compound interest, the effects of your habits multiply 
as you repeat them. They seem to make little difference on any given day and yet 
the impact they deliver over the months and years can be enormous. It is only 
when looking back two, five, or perhaps ten years later that the value of good 
habits and the cost of bad ones becomes strikingly apparent. 

This can be a difficult concept to appreciate in daily life. We often dismiss 
small changes because they don’t seem to matter very much in the moment. If 


you save a little money now, you’re still not a millionaire. If you go to the gym 
three days in a row, you’re still out of shape. If you study Mandarin for an hour 
tonight, you still haven’t learned the language. We make a few changes, but the 
results never seem to come quickly and so we slide back into our previous 
routines. 

Unfortunately, the slow pace of transformation also makes it easy to let a bad 
habit slide. If you eat an unhealthy meal today, the scale doesn’t move much. If 
you work late tonight and ignore your family, they will forgive you. If you 
procrastinate and put your project off until tomorrow, there will usually be time 
to finish it later. A single decision is easy to dismiss. 

But when we repeat 1 percent errors, day after day, by replicating poor 
decisions, duplicating tiny mistakes, and rationalizing little excuses, our small 
choices compound into toxic results. It’s the accumulation of many missteps—a 
1 percent decline here and there—that eventually leads to a problem. 

The impact created by a change in your habits is similar to the effect of 
shifting the route of an airplane by just a few degrees. Imagine you are flying 
from Los Angeles to New York City. If a pilot leaving from LAX adjusts the 
heading just 3.5 degrees south, you will land in Washington, D.C., instead of 
New York. Such a small change is barely noticeable at takeoff—the nose of the 
airplane moves just a few feet—but when magnified across the entire United 
States, you end up hundreds of miles apart.* 

Similarly, a slight change in your daily habits can guide your life to a very 
different destination. Making a choice that is 





That said, it doesn’t matter how successful or unsuccessful you are right now. 
What matters is whether your habits are putting you on the path toward success. 
You should be far more concerned with your current trajectory than with your 
current results. If you’re a millionaire but you spend more than you earn each 
month, then you’re on a bad trajectory. If your spending habits don’t change, it’s 
not going to end well. Conversely, if you’re broke, but you save a little bit every 
month, then you’re on the path toward financial freedom—even if you’re 
moving slower than you’d like. 

Your outcomes are a lagging measure of your habits. Your net worth is a 
lagging measure of your financial habits. Your weight is a lagging measure of 
your eating habits. Your knowledge is a lagging measure of your learning habits. 
Your clutter is a lagging measure of your cleaning habits. You get what you 


repeat. 
If you want to predict where you’ll end up in life, all you have to do is follow 
the curve of tiny gains or tiny losses, and see how your daily choices will 


compound ten or twenty years down the line. Are you spending less than you) 
earn each month? Are you making it into the gym each week? Are you reading 
books and learning something new each day? Tiny battles like these are the ones 
that will define your future self. 

Time magnifies the margin between success and failure. It will multiply 
whatever you feed it. Good habits make time your ally: Bad habits make time 
your enemy. 

Habits are a double-edged sword. Bad habits can cut you down just as easily 
as good habits can build you up, which is why understanding the details is 


crucial. You need to know how habits work and how to design them to your 
liking, so you can avoid the dangerous half of the blade. 





YOUR HABITS CAN COMPOUND FOR YOU OR AGAINST YOU 


Positive Compounding 














WHAT PROGRESS IS REALLY LIKE 


Imagine that you have an ice cube sitting on the table in front of you. The room 
is cold and you can see your breath. It is currently twenty-five degrees. Ever so 
slowly, the room begins to heat up. 

Twenty-six degrees. 

Twenty-seven. 

Twenty-eight. 

The ice cube is still sitting on the table in front of you. 

Twenty-nine degrees. 


Thirty. 

Thirty-one. 

Still, nothing has happened. 

Then, thirty-two degrees. The ice begins to melt. A one-degree shift, 
seemingly no different from the temperature increases before it, has unlocked a 
huge change. 

Breakthrough moments are often the result of many previous actions, which 
build up the potential required to unleash a major change. This pattern shows up 
everywhere. Cancer spends 80 percent of its life undetectable, then takes over 
the body in months. Bamboo can barely be seen for the first five years as it 
builds extensive root systems underground before exploding ninety feet into the 
air within six weeks. 

Similarly, habits often appear to make no difference until you cross a critical 
threshold and unlock a new level of performance. In the early and middle stages 


of any quest, there is often a Valley of Disappointment. You expect to make 








This is one of the core reasons why it is so hard to build habits that last. 
People make a few small changes, fail to see a tangible result, and decide to stop. 
You think, “I’ve been running every day for a month, so why can’t I see any 
change in my body?” Once this kind of thinking takes over, it’s easy to let good 
habits fall by the wayside. But in order to make a meaningful difference, habits 
need to persist long enough to break through this plateau—what I call the 
Plateau of Latent Potential. 

If you find yourself struggling to build a good habit or break a bad one, it is 
not because you have lost your ability to improve. It is often because you have 
not yet crossed the Plateau of Latent Potential. Complaining about not achieving 
success despite working hard is like complaining about an ice cube not melting 
when you heated it from twenty-five to thirty-one degrees. Your work was not 
wasted; it is just being stored. All the action happens at thirty-two degrees. 


The outside world only sees the most dramatic event 
rather than all that preceded it. But you know that it’s the work you did long ago 
—when it seemed that you weren’t making any progress—that makes the jump 
today possible. 

It is the human equivalent of geological pressure. Two tectonic plates can 
grind against one another for millions of years, the tension slowly building all 


the while. Then, one day, they rub each other once again, in the same fashion 
they have for ages, but this time the tension is too great. An earthquake erupts. 
Change can take years—before it happens all at once. 

Mastery requires patience. The San Antonio Spurs, one of the most successful 
teams in NBA history, have a quote from social reformer Jacob Riis hanging in 
their locker room: “When nothing seems to help, I go and look at a stonecutter 
hammering away at his rock, perhaps a hundred times without as much as a 
crack showing in it. Yet at the hundred and first blow it will split in two, and I 
know it was not that last blow that did it—but all that had gone before.” 


THE PLATEAU OF LATENT POTENTIAL 







RESULTS WHAT YOU THINK 
SHOULD HAPPEN 


&lt;— WHAT ACTUALLY HAPPENS 


VALLEY OF 
DISAPPOINTMENT 


FIGURE 2: We often expect progress to be linear. At the very least, we hope it will come quickly. In reality, the results of our efforts are often delayed. It is not until months or years later 
that we realize the true value of the previous work we have done. This can result in a “valley of disappointment” where people feel discouraged after putting in weeks or months of hard work 
without experiencing any results. However, this work was not wasted. It was simply being stored. It is not until much later that the full value of previous efforts is revealed. 


All big things come from small beginnings. The seed of every habit is a 
single, tiny decision. But as that decision is repeated, a habit sprouts and grows 
stronger. Roots entrench themselves and branches grow. The task of breaking a 
bad habit is like uprooting a powerful oak within us. And the task of building a 
good habit is like cultivating a delicate flower one day at a time. 

But what determines whether we stick with a habit long enough to survive the 
Plateau of Latent Potential and break through to the other side? What is it that 


causes some people to slide into unwanted habits and enables others to enjoy the 
compounding effects of good ones? 


FORGET ABOUT GOALS, FOCUS ON SYSTEMS INSTEAD 


Prevailing wisdom claims that the best way to achieve what we want in life— 
getting into better shape, building a successful business, relaxing more and 
worrying less, spending more time with friends and family—is to set specific, 
actionable goals. 

For many years, this was how I approached my habits, too. Each one was a 
goal to be reached. I set goals for the grades I wanted to get in school, for the 
weights I wanted to lift in the gym, for the profits I wanted to earn in business. I 
succeeded at a few, but I failed at a lot of them. Eventually, I began to realize 
that my results had very little to do with the goals I set and nearly everything to 
do with the systems I followed. 

What’s the difference between systems and goals? It’s a distinction I first 
learned from Scott Adams, the cartoonist behind the Dilbert comic. Goals are 
about the results you want to achieve. Systems are about the processes that lead 
to those results. 


° If you’re a coach, your goal might be to win a championship. Your 
system is the way you recruit players, manage your assistant coaches, 
and conduct practice. 

° If you’re an entrepreneur, your goal might be to build a million-dollar 
business. Your system is how you test product ideas, hire employees, 
and run marketing campaigns. 

° If you’re a musician, your goal might be to play a new piece. Your 
system is how often you practice, how you break down and tackle 
difficult measures, and your method for receiving feedback from your 
instructor. 


Now for the interesting question: If you completely ignored your goals and 
focused only on your system, would you still succeed? For example, if you were 
a basketball coach and you ignored your goal to win a championship and 
focused only on what your team does at practice each day, would you still get 
results? 

I think you would. 


The goal in any sport is to finish with the best score, but it would be ridiculous 
to spend the whole game staring at the scoreboard. The only way to actually win 
is to get better each day. In the words of three-time Super Bowl winner Bill 
Walsh, “The score takes care of itself.” The same is true for other areas of life. If 
you want better results, then forget about setting goals. Focus on your system 
instead. 

What do I mean by this? Are goals completely useless? Of course not. Goals 
are good for setting a direction, but systems are best for making progress. A 
handful of problems arise when you spend too much time thinking about your 
goals and not enough time designing your systems. 


Goal setting suffers from a serious case of survivorship bias. We concentrate on 
the people who end up winning—the survivors—and mistakenly assume that 
ambitious goals led to their success while overlooking all of the people who had 
the same objective but didn’t succeed. 

Every Olympian wants to win a gold medal. Every candidate wants to get the 
job. And if successful and unsuccessful people share the same goals, then the 
goal cannot be what differentiates the winners from the losers. It wasn’t the goal 
of winning the Tour de France that propelled the British cyclists to the top of the 
sport. Presumably, they had wanted to win the race every year before—just like 
every other professional team. The goal had always been there. It was only when 
they implemented a system of continuous small improvements that they achieved 
a different outcome. 


it. If you summon 
the energy to tidy up, then you will have a clean room—for now. But if you 
maintain the same sloppy, pack-rat habits that led to a messy room in the first 
place, soon yov’ll be looking at a new pile of clutter and hoping for another burst 
of motivation. You’re left chasing the same outcome because you never changed 
the system behind it. You treated a symptom without addressing the cause. 
Achieving a goal only changes your life for the moment. That’s the 
counterintuitive thing about improvement. We think we need to change our 
results, but the results are not the problem. What we really need to change are 
the systems that cause those results. When you solve problems at the results 


level, you only solve them temporarily. In order to improve for good, you need 
to solve problems at the systems level. Fix the inputs and the outputs will fix 
themselves. 


The implicit assumption behind any goal is this: “Once I reach my goal, then I’ Il 
be happy.” The problem with a goals-first mentality is that you’re continually 
putting happiness off until the next milestone. I’ve slipped into this trap so many 
times I’ve lost count. For years, happiness was always something for my future 
self to enjoy. I promised myself that once I gained twenty pounds of muscle or 
after my business was featured in the New York Times, then I could finally relax. 

Furthermore, goals create an “either-or” conflict: either you achieve your goal 
and are successful or you fail and you are a disappointment. You mentally box 
yourself into a narrow version of happiness. This is misguided. It is unlikely that 
your actual path through life will match the exact journey you had in mind when 
you set out. It makes no sense to restrict your satisfaction to one scenario when 
there are many paths to success. 

A systems-first mentality provides the antidote. When you fall in love with the 
process rather than the product, you don’t have to wait to give yourself 
permission to be happy. You can be satisfied anytime your system is running. 
And a system can be successful in many different forms, not just the one you 
first envision. 


Finally, a goal-oriented mind-set can create a “yo-yo” effect. Many runners work 
hard for months, but as soon as they cross the finish line, they stop training. The 
race is no longer there to motivate them. When all of your hard work is focused 
on a particular goal, what is left to push you forward after you achieve it? This is 
why many people find themselves reverting to their old habits after 
accomplishing a goal. 

The purpose of setting goals is to win the game. The purpose of building 
systems is to continue playing the game. True long-term thinking is goal-less 
thinking. It’s not about any single accomplishment. It is about the cycle of 
endless refinement and continuous improvement. Ultimately, it is your 
commitment to the process that will determine your progress. 


A SYSTEM OF ATOMIC HABITS 


If you’re having trouble changing your habits, the problem isn’t you. The 
problem is your system. Bad habits repeat themselves again and again not 
because you don’t want to change, but because you have the wrong system for 
change. 

You do not rise to the level of your goals. You fall to the level of your 
systems. 

Focusing on the overall system, rather than a single goal, is one of the core 
themes of this book. It is also one of the deeper meanings behind the word 
atomic. By now, you’ve probably realized that an atomic habit refers to a tiny 
change, a marginal gain, a 1 percent improvement. But atomic habits are not just 
any old habits, however small. They are little habits that are part of a larger 
system. Just as atoms are the building blocks of molecules, atomic habits are the 
building blocks of remarkable results. 

Habits are like the atoms of our lives. Each one is a fundamental unit that 
contributes to your overall improvement. At first, these tiny routines seem 
insignificant, but soon they build on each other and fuel bigger wins that 
multiply to a degree that far outweighs the cost of their initial investment. They 
are both small and mighty. This is the meaning of the phrase atomic habits—a 
regular practice or routine that is not only small and easy to do, but also the 
source of incredible power; a component of the system of compound growth. 


Chapter Summary 


2 


How Your Habits Shape Your Identity (and Vice 
Versa) 


W. sm SO easy to repeat bad habits and so hard to form good ones? Few things 


can have a more powerful impact on your life than improving your daily habits. 
And yet it is likely that this time next year yov’ll be doing the same thing rather 
than something better. 

It often feels difficult to keep good habits going for more than a few days, 
even with sincere effort and the occasional burst of motivation. Habits like 
exercise, meditation, journaling, and cooking are reasonable for a day or two and 
then become a hassle. 

However, once your habits are established, they seem to stick around forever 
—especially the unwanted ones. Despite our best intentions, unhealthy habits 
like eating junk food, watching too much television, procrastinating, and 
smoking can feel impossible to break. 

Changing our habits is challenging for two reasons: (1) we try to change the 
wrong thing and (2) we try to change our habits in the wrong way. In this 
chapter, I’ll address the first point. In the chapters that follow, I’ll answer the 
second. 

Our first mistake is that we try to change the wrong thing. To understand what 
I mean, consider that there are three levels at which change can occur. You can 
imagine them like the layers of an onion. 


THREE LAYERS OF BEHAVIOR CHANGE 


OUTCOMES 
PROCESSES 
IDENTITY 
FIGURE 3: There are three layers of behavior change: a change in your outcomes, a change in your processes, or a change in your identity. 


biases you hold are associated with this level. 

Outcomes are about what you get. Processes are about what you do. Identity is 
about what you believe. When it comes to building habits that last—when it 
comes to building a system of 1 percent improvements—the problem is not that 
one level is “better” or “worse” than another. All levels of change are useful in 
their own way. The problem is the direction of change. 

Many people begin the process of changing their habits by focusing on what 
they want to achieve. This leads us to outcome-based habits. The alternative is to 
build identity-based habits. With this approach, we start by focusing on who we 
wish to become. 


OUTCOME-BASED HABITS 


IDENTITY-BASED HABITS 


FIGURE 4: With outcome-based habits, the focus is on what you want to achieve. With identity-based habits, the focus is on who you wish to become. 


Imagine two people resisting a cigarette. When offered a smoke, the first 
person says, “No thanks. I’m trying to quit.” It sounds like a reasonable 
response, but this person still believes they are a smoker who is trying to be 
something else. They are hoping their behavior will change while carrying 
around the same beliefs. 

The second person declines by saying, “No thanks. I’m not a smoker.” It’s a 
small difference, but this statement signals a shift in identity. Smoking was part 
of their former life, not their current one. They no longer identify as someone 
who smokes. 

Most people don’t even consider identity change when they set out to 
improve. They just think, “I want to be skinny (outcome) and if I stick to this 
diet, then I’ll be skinny (process).” They set goals and determine the actions they 


should take to achieve those goals without considering the beliefs that drive their 
actions. They never shift the way they look at themselves, and they don’t realize 
that their old identity can sabotage their new plans for change. 

Behind every system of actions are a system of beliefs. The system of a 
democracy is founded on beliefs like freedom, majority rule, and social equality. 
The system of a dictatorship has a very different set of beliefs like absolute 
authority and strict obedience. You can imagine many ways to try to get more 
people to vote in a democracy, but such behavior change would never get off the 
ground in a dictatorship. That’s not the identity of the system. Voting is a 
behavior that is impossible under a certain set of beliefs. 

A similar pattern exists whether we are discussing individuals, organizations, 
or societies. There are a set of beliefs and assumptions that shape the system, an 
identity behind the habits. 

Behavior that is incongruent with the self will not last. You may want more 
money, but if your identity is someone who consumes rather than creates, then 
you’ll continue to be pulled toward spending rather than earning. You may want 
better health, but if you continue to prioritize comfort over accomplishment, 
you’ll be drawn to relaxing rather than training. It’s hard to change your habits if 
you never change the underlying beliefs that led to your past behavior. You have 
anew goal and a new plan, but you haven’t changed who you are. 

The story of Brian Clark, an entrepreneur from Boulder, Colorado, provides a 
good example. “For as long as I can remember, I’ve chewed my fingernails,” 
Clark told me. “It started as a nervous habit when I was young, and then 
morphed into an undesirable grooming ritual. One day, I resolved to stop 
chewing my nails until they grew out a bit. Through mindful willpower alone, I 
managed to do it.” 

Then, Clark did something surprising. 

“T asked my wife to schedule my first-ever manicure,” he said. “My thought 
was that if I started paying to maintain my nails, I wouldn’t chew them. And it 
worked, but not for the monetary reason. What happened was the manicure made 
my fingers look really nice for the first time. The manicurist even said that— 
other than the chewing—I had really healthy, attractive nails. Suddenly, I was 
proud of my fingernails. And even though that’s something I had never aspired 
to, it made all the difference. I’ve never chewed my nails since; not even a single 
close call. And it’s because I now take pride in properly caring for them.” 

The ultimate form of intrinsic motivation is when a habit becomes part of your 
identity. It’s one thing to say I’m the type of person who wants this. It’s 
something very different to say I’m the type of person who is this. 

The more pride you have in a particular aspect of your identity, the more 


motivated you will be to maintain the habits associated with it. If you’re proud 
of how your hair looks, you’ll develop all sorts of habits to care for and maintain 
it. If you’re proud of the size of your biceps, you’! make sure you never skip an 
upper-body workout. If you’re proud of the scarves you knit, you’ll be more 
likely to spend hours knitting each week. Once your pride gets involved, you’ll 
fight tooth and nail to maintain your habits. 

True behavior change is identity change. You might start a habit because of 
motivation, but the only reason you’ll stick with one is that it becomes part of 
your identity. Anyone can convince themselves to visit the gym or eat healthy 
once or twice, but if you don’t shift the belief behind the behavior, then it is hard 
to stick with long-term changes. Improvements are only temporary until they 
become part of who you are. 


° The goal is not to read a book, the goal is to become a reader. 

° The goal is not to run a marathon, the goal is to become a runner. 

° The goal is not to learn an instrument, the goal is to become a 
musician. 


Your behaviors are usually a reflection of your identity. What you do is an 
indication of the type of person you believe that you are—either consciously or 
nonconsciously.* Research has shown that once a person believes in a particular 
aspect of their identity, they are more likely to act in alignment with that belief. 
For example, people who identified as “being a voter” were more likely to vote 
than those who simply claimed “voting” was an action they wanted to perform. 
Similarly, the person who incorporates exercise into their identity doesn’t have 
to convince themselves to train. Doing the right thing is easy. After all, when 
your behavior and your identity are fully aligned, you are no longer pursuing 
behavior change. You are simply acting like the type of person you already 
believe yourself to be. 

Like all aspects of habit formation, this, too, is a double-edged sword. When 
working for you, identity change can be a powerful force for selfimprovement. 
When working against you, though, identity change can be a curse. Once you 
have adopted an identity, it can be easy to let your allegiance to it impact your 
ability to change. Many people walk through life in a cognitive slumber, blindly 
following the norms attached to their identity. 


“T’m terrible with directions.” 

“Tm not a morning person.” 

“I’m bad at remembering people’s names.” 
“Tm always late.” 

“T’m not good with technology.” 

“T’m horrible at math.” 


... and a thousand other variations. 

When you have repeated a story to yourself for years, it is easy to slide into 
these mental grooves and accept them as a fact. In time, you begin to resist 
certain actions because “that’s not who I am.” There is internal pressure to 
maintain your self-image and behave in a way that is consistent with your 
beliefs. You find whatever way you can to avoid contradicting yourself. 

The more deeply a thought or action is tied to your identity, the more difficult 
it is to change it. It can feel comfortable to believe what your culture believes 
(group identity) or to do what upholds your self-image (personal identity), even 
if it’s wrong. The biggest barrier to positive change at any level—individual, 
team, society—is identity conflict. Good habits can make rational sense, but if 
they conflict with your identity, you will fail to put them into action. 

On any given day, you may struggle with your habits because you’re too busy 
or too tired or too overwhelmed or hundreds of other reasons. Over the long run, 
however, the real reason you fail to stick with habits is that your self-image gets 
in the way. This is why you can’t get too attached to one version of your 
identity. Progress requires unlearning. Becoming the best version of yourself 
requires you to continuously edit your beliefs, and to upgrade and expand your 
identity. 

This brings us to an important question: If your beliefs and worldview play 
such an important role in your behavior, where do they come from in the first 
place? How, exactly, is your identity formed? And how can you emphasize new 
aspects of your identity that serve you and gradually erase the pieces that hinder 
you? 


THE 'TWO-STEP PROCESS TO CHANGING YOUR IDENTITY 


Your identity emerges out of your habits. You are not born with preset beliefs. 
Every belief, including those about yourself, is learned and conditioned through 
experience.* 


More precisely, your habits are how you embody your identity. When you 
make your bed each day, you embody the identity of an organized person. When 
you write each day, you embody the identity of a creative person. When you 
train each day, you embody the identity of an athletic person. 

The more you repeat a behavior, the more you reinforce the identity 
associated with that behavior. In fact, the word identity was originally derived 
from the Latin words essentitas, which means being, and identidem, which 
means repeatedly. Your identity is literally your “repeated beingness.” 

Whatever your identity is right now, you only believe it because you have 
proof of it. If you go to church every Sunday for twenty years, you have 
evidence that you are religious. If you study biology for one hour every night, 
you have evidence that you are studious. If you go to the gym even when it’s 
snowing, you have evidence that you are committed to fitness. The more 
evidence you have for a belief, the more strongly you will believe it. 

For most of my early life, I didn’t consider myself a writer. If you were to ask 
any of my high school teachers or college professors, they would tell you I was 
an average writer at best: certainly not a standout. When I began my writing 
career, I published a new article every Monday and Thursday for the first few 
years. As the evidence grew, so did my identity as a writer. I didn’t start out as a 
writer. I became one through my habits. 

Of course, your habits are not the only actions that influence your identity, but 
by virtue of their frequency they are usually the most important ones. Each 
experience in life modifies your self-image, but it’s unlikely you would consider 
yourself a soccer player because you kicked a ball once or an artist because you 
scribbled a picture. As you repeat these actions, however, the evidence 
accumulates and your self-image begins to change. The effect of one-off 
experiences tends to fade away while the effect of habits gets reinforced with 
time, which means your habits contribute most of the evidence that shapes your 
identity. In this way, the process of building habits is actually the process of 
becoming yourself. 

This is a gradual evolution. We do not change by snapping our fingers and 
deciding to be someone entirely new. We change bit by bit, day by day, habit by 
habit. We are continually undergoing microevolutions of the self. 

Each habit is like a suggestion: “Hey, maybe this is who I am.” If you finish a 
book, then perhaps you are the type of person who likes reading. If you go to the 
gym, then perhaps you are the type of person who likes exercise. If you practice 











This is one reason why meaningful change does 
not require radical change. Small habits can make a meaningful difference by 
providing evidence of a new identity. And if a change is meaningful, it actually 
is big. That’s the paradox of making small improvements. 

Putting this all together, you can see that habits are the path to changing your 
identity. The most practical way to change who you are is to change what you 
do. 


Each time you write a page, you are a writer. 

Each time you practice the violin, you are a musician. 

Each time you start a workout, you are an athlete. 

Each time you encourage your employees, you are a leader. 


Each habit not only gets results but also teaches you something far more 
important: to trust yourself. You start to believe you can actually accomplish 
these things. When the votes mount up and the evidence begins to change, the 
story you tell yourself begins to change as well. 

Of course, it works the opposite way, too. Every time you choose to perform a 
bad habit, it’s a vote for that identity. The good news is that you don’t need to be 
perfect. In any election, there are going to be votes for both sides. You don’t 
need a unanimous vote to win an election; you just need a majority. It doesn’t 
matter if you cast a few votes for a bad behavior or an unproductive habit. Your 
goal is simply to win the majority of the time. 

New identities require new evidence. If you keep casting the same votes 
you’ve always cast, you’re going to get the same results you’ve always had. If 
nothing changes, nothing is going to change. 

It is a simple two-step process: 


L. Decide the type of person you want to be. 
2. Prove it to yourself with small wins. 


First, decide who you want to be. This holds at any level—as an individual, as 
a team, as a community, as a nation. What do you want to stand for? What are 
your principles and values? Who do you wish to become? 

These are big questions, and many people aren’t sure where to begin—but 
they do know what kind of results they want: to get six-pack abs or to feel less 


anxious or to double their salary. That’s fine. Start there and work backward 
from the results you want to the type of person who could get those results. Ask 
yourself, “Who is the type of person that could get the outcome I want?” Who is 
the type of person that could lose forty pounds? Who is the type of person that 
could learn a new language? Who is the type of person that could run a 
successful start-up? 


For example, “Who is the type of person who could write a book?” It’s 


This process can lead to beliefs like: 





“T’m the kind of teacher who stands up for her students.” 
“Pm the kind of doctor who gives each patient the time and empathy 
they need.” 

° “T’m the kind of manager who advocates for her employees.” 


Once you have a handle on the type of person you want to be, you can begin 
taking small steps to reinforce your desired identity. I have a friend who lost 


over 100 pounds by asking herself, “What would a healthy person do?” All day 
long, she would use this question as a guide. Would a healthy person walk or 





The concept of identity-based habits is our first introduction to another key 
theme in this book: feedback loops. Your habits shape your identity, and your 
identity shapes your habits. It’s a two-way street. The formation of all habits is a 
feedback loop (a concept we will explore in depth in the next chapter), but it’s 
important to let your values, principles, and identity drive the loop rather than 


your results. The focus should always be on becoming that type of person, not 








THE REAL REASON HABITS MATTER 


Identity change is the North Star of habit change. The remainder of this book 
will provide you with step-by-step instructions on how to build better habits in 
yourself, your family, your team, your company, and anywhere else you wish. 


But the true question is: “Are you becoming the type of person you want to 
become?” The first step is not what or how, but who. You need to know who you 
want to be. Otherwise, your quest for change is like a boat without a rudder. And 
that’s why we are starting here. 

You have the power to change your beliefs about yourself. Your identity is not 
set in stone. You have a choice in every moment. You can choose the identity 
you want to reinforce today with the habits you choose today. And this brings us 
to the deeper purpose of this book and the real reason habits matter. 

Building better habits isn’t about littering your day with life hacks. It’s not 
about flossing one tooth each night or taking a cold shower each morning or 
wearing the same outfit each day. It’s not about achieving external measures of 
success like earning more money, losing weight, or reducing stress. Habits can 
help you achieve all of these things, but fundamentally they are not about having 
something. They are about becoming someone. 

Ultimately, your habits matter because they help you become the type of 
person you wish to be. They are the channel through which you develop your 
deepest beliefs about yourself. Quite literally, you become your habits. 


How to Build Better Habits in 4 Simple Steps 


I, 1, a psychologist named Edward Thorndike conducted an experiment that 


would lay the foundation for our understanding of how habits form and the rules 
that guide our behavior. Thorndike was interested in studying the behavior of 
animals, and he started by working with cats. 

He would place each cat inside a device known as a puzzle box. The box was 
designed so that the cat could escape through a door “by some simple act, such 
as pulling at a loop of cord, pressing a lever, or stepping on a platform.” For 
example, one box contained a lever that, when pressed, would open a door on 
the side of the box. Once the door had been opened, the cat could dart out and 
run over to a bowl of food. 

Most cats wanted to escape as soon as they were placed inside the box. They 
would poke their nose into the corners, stick their paws through openings, and 
claw at loose objects. After a few minutes of exploration, the cats would happen 
to press the magical lever, the door would open, and they would escape. 

Thorndike tracked the behavior of each cat across many trials. In the 
beginning, the animals moved around the box at random. But as soon as the 
lever had been pressed and the door opened, the process of learning began. 
Gradually, each cat learned to associate the action of pressing the lever with the 
reward of escaping the box and getting to the food. 

After twenty to thirty trials, this behavior became so automatic and habitual 
that the cat could escape within a few seconds. For example, Thorndike noted, 
“Cat 12 took the following times to perform the act. 160 seconds, 30 seconds, 90 
seconds, 60, 15, 28, 20, 30, 22, 11, 15, 20, 12, 10, 14, 10, 8, 8, 5, 10, 8, 6, 6, 7.” 

During the first three trials, the cat escaped in an average of 1.5 minutes. 
During the last three trials, it escaped in an average of 6.3 seconds. With 
practice, each cat made fewer errors and their actions became quicker and more 
automatic. Rather than repeat the same mistakes, the cat began to cut straight to 


the solution. 

From his studies, Thorndike described the learning process by stating, 
“behaviors followed by satisfying consequences tend to be repeated and those 
that produce unpleasant consequences are less likely to be repeated.” His work 
provides the perfect starting point for discussing how habits form in our own 
lives. It also provides answers to some fundamental questions like: What are 
habits? And why does the brain bother building them at all? 


WHY YOUR BRAIN BUILDS HABITS 


A habit is a behavior that has been repeated enough times to become automatic. 
The process of habit formation begins with trial and error. Whenever you 
encounter a new Situation in life, your brain has to make a decision. How do I 
respond to this? The first time you come across a problem, you’re not sure how 
to solve it. Like Thorndike’s cat, you’re just trying things out to see what works. 

Neurological activity in the brain is high during this period. You are carefully 
analyzing the situation and making conscious decisions about how to act. You’re 
taking in tons of new information and trying to make sense of it all. The brain is 
busy learning the most effective course of action. 

Occasionally, like a cat pressing on a lever, you stumble across a solution. 
You’re feeling anxious, and you discover that going for a run calms
 you down. 
You’re mentally exhausted from a long day of work, and you learn that playing 
video games relaxes you. You’re exploring, exploring, exploring, and then— 
BAM—a reward. 

After you stumble upon an unexpected reward, you alter your strategy for next 
time. Your brain immediately begins to catalog the events that preceded the 
reward. Wait a minute—that felt good. What did I do right before that? 

This is the feedback loop behind all human behavior: try, fail, learn, try 
differently. With practice, the useless movements fade away and the useful 
actions get reinforced. That’s a habit forming. 

Whenever you face a problem repeatedly, your brain begins to automate the 
process of solving it. Your habits are just a series of automatic solutions that 
solve the problems and stresses you face regularly. As behavioral scientist Jason 
Hreha writes, “Habits are, simply, reliable solutions to recurring problems in our 
environment.” 

As habits are created, the level of activity in the brain decreases. You learn to 
lock in on the cues that predict success and tune out everything else. When a 
similar situation arises in the future, you know exactly what to look for. There is 


no longer a need to analyze every angle of a situation. Your brain skips the 
process of trial and error and creates a mental rule: if this, then that. These 
cognitive scripts can be followed automatically whenever the situation is 
appropriate. Now, whenever you feel stressed, you get the itch to run. As soon as 
you walk in the door from work, you grab the video game controller. A choice 
that once required effort is now automatic. A habit has been created. 

Habits are mental shortcuts learned from experience. In a sense, a habit is just 
a memory of the steps you previously followed to solve a problem in the past. 
Whenever the conditions are right, you can draw on this memory and 
automatically apply the same solution. The primary reason the brain remembers 
the past is to better predict what will work in the future. 

Habit formation is incredibly useful because the conscious mind is the 
bottleneck of the brain. It can only pay attention to one problem at a time. As a 
result, your brain is always working to preserve your conscious attention for 
whatever task is most essential. Whenever possible, the conscious mind likes to 
pawn off tasks to the nonconscious mind to do automatically. This is precisely 
what happens when a habit is formed. Habits reduce cognitive load and free up 
mental capacity, so you can allocate your attention to other tasks. 

Despite their efficiency, some people still wonder about the benefits of habits. 
The argument goes like this: “Will habits make my life dull? I don’t want to 
pigeonhole myself into a lifestyle I don’t enjoy. Doesn’t so much routine take 
away the vibrancy and spontaneity of life?” Hardly. Such questions set up a false 
dichotomy. They make you think that you have to choose between building 
habits and attaining freedom. In reality, the two complement each other. 

Habits do not restrict freedom. They create it. In fact, the people who don’t 
have their habits handled are often the ones with the least amount of freedom. 
Without good financial habits, you will always be struggling for the next dollar. 
Without good health habits, you will always seem to be short on energy. Without 
good learning habits, you will always feel like you’re behind the curve. If you’re 
always being forced to make decisions about simple tasks—when should I work 
out, where do I go to write, when do I pay the bills—then you have less time for 
freedom. It’s only by making the fundamentals of life easier that you can create 
the mental space needed for free thinking and creativity. 

Conversely, when you have your habits dialed in and the basics of life are 
handled and done, your mind is free to focus on new challenges and master the 
next set of problems. Building habits in the present allows you to do more of 
what you want in the future. 


THE SCIENCE OF HOW HABITS WORK 


The process of building a habit can be divided into four simple steps: cue, 
craving, response, and reward.* Breaking it down into these fundamental parts 
can help us understand what a habit is, how it works, and how to improve it. 


CUE CRAVING f RESPONSE REWARD 
1 2 5 4 


FIGURE 5: All habits proceed through four stages in the same order: cue, craving, response, and reward. 


This four-step pattern is the backbone of every habit, and your brain runs 
through these steps in the same order each time. 

First, there is the cue. The cue triggers your brain to initiate a behavior. It is a 
bit of information that predicts a reward. Our prehistoric ancestors were paying 
attention to cues that signaled the location of primary rewards like food, water, 
and sex. Today, we spend most of our time learning cues that predict secondary 
rewards like money and fame, power and status, praise and approval, love and 
friendship, or a sense of personal satisfaction. (Of course, these pursuits also 
indirectly improve our odds of survival and reproduction, which is the deeper 
motive behind everything we do.) 

Your mind is continuously analyzing your internal and external environment 
for hints of where rewards are located. Because the cue is the first indication that 
we’re close to a reward, it naturally leads to a craving. 

Cravings are the second step, and they are the motivational force behind every 
habit. Without some level of motivation or desire—without craving a change— 
we have no reason to act. What you crave is not the habit itself but the change in 
state it delivers. You do not crave smoking a cigarette, you crave the feeling of 
relief it provides. You are not motivated by brushing your teeth but rather by the 
feeling of a clean mouth. You do not want to turn on the television, you want to 
be entertained. Every craving is linked to a desire to change your internal state. 
This is an important point that we will discuss in detail later. 

Cravings differ from person to person. In theory, any piece of information 
could trigger a craving, but in practice, people are not motivated by the same 
cues. For a gambler, the sound of slot machines can be a potent trigger that 


sparks an intense wave of desire. For someone who rarely gambles, the jingles 
and chimes of the casino are just background noise. Cues are meaningless until 
they are interpreted. The thoughts, feelings, and emotions of the observer are 
what transform a cue into a craving. 

The third step is the response. The response is the actual habit you perform, 
which can take the form of a thought or an action. Whether a response occurs 
depends on how motivated you are and how much friction is associated with the 
behavior. If a particular action requires more physical or mental effort than you 
are willing to expend, then you won’t do it. Your response also depends on your 
ability. It sounds simple, but a habit can occur only if you are capable of doing 
it. If you want to dunk a basketball but can’t jump high enough to reach the 
hoop, well, you’re out of luck. 

Finally, the response delivers a reward. Rewards are the end goal of every 
habit. The cue is about noticing the reward. The craving is about wanting the 
reward. The response is about obtaining the reward. We chase rewards because 
they serve two purposes: (1) they satisfy us and (2) they teach us. 

The first purpose of rewards is to satisfy your craving. Yes, rewards provide 
benefits on their own. Food and water deliver the energy you need to survive. 
Getting a promotion brings more money and respect. Getting in shape improves 
your health and your dating prospects. But the more immediate benefit is that 
rewards satisfy your craving to eat or to gain status or to win approval. At least 
for a moment, rewards deliver contentment and relief from craving. 

Second, rewards teach us which actions are worth remembering in the future. 
Your brain is a reward detector. As you go about your life, your sensory nervous 
system is continuously monitoring which actions satisfy your desires and deliver 
pleasure. Feelings of pleasure and disappointment are part of the feedback 
mechanism that helps your brain distinguish useful actions from useless ones. 
Rewards close the feedback loop and complete the habit cycle. 

If a behavior is insufficient in any of the four stages, it will not become a 
habit. Eliminate the cue and your habit will never start. Reduce the craving and 
you won’t experience enough motivation to act. Make the behavior difficult and 
you won’t be able to do it. And if the reward fails to satisfy your desire, then 
you’ll have no reason to do it again in the future. Without the first three steps, a 
behavior will not occur. Without all four, a behavior will not be repeated. 


THE HABIT LOOP 


CUE CRAVING 





REWARD RESPONSE 


FIGURE 6: The four stages of habit are best described as a feedback loop. They form an endless cycle that is running every moment you are alive. This “habit loop” is continually scanning 
the environment, predicting what will happen next, trying out different responses, and learning from the results.* 


In summary, the cue triggers a craving, which motivates a response, which 
provides a reward, which satisfies the craving and, ultimately, becomes 
associated with the cue. Together, these four steps form a neurological feedback 
loop—cue, craving, response, reward; cue, craving, response, reward—that 
ultimately allows you to create automatic habits. This cycle is known as the habit 
loop. 

This four-step process is not something that happens occasionally, but rather it 
is an endless feedback loop that is running and active during every moment you 
are alive—even now. The brain is continually scanning the environment, 
predicting what will happen next, trying out different responses, and learning 
from the results. The entire process is completed in a split second, and we use it 
again and again without realizing everything that has been packed into the 


previous moment. 

We can split these four steps into two phases: the problem phase and the 
solution phase. The problem phase includes the cue and the craving, and it is 
when you realize that something needs to change. The solution phase includes 
the response and the reward, and it is when you take action and achieve the 
change you desire. 


Problem phase 


1. Cue 
2. Craving 


Solution phase 


3. Response 
4, Reward 


All behavior is driven by the desire to solve a problem. Sometimes the 
problem is that you notice something good and you want to obtain it. Sometimes 
the problem is that you are experiencing pain and you want to relieve it. Either 
way, the purpose of every habit is to solve the problems you face. 

In the table on the following page, you can see a few examples of what this 
looks like in real life. 

Imagine walking into a dark room and flipping on the light switch. You have 
performed this simple habit so many times that it occurs without thinking. You 
proceed through all four stages in the fraction of a second. The urge to act strikes 
you without thinking. 


Problem phase 


1. Cue: Your phone buzzes with a new text message. 


2. Craving: You want to learn the contents of the message. 


Solution phase 


3. Response: You grab your phone and read the text. 


4. Reward: You safi$fy your craving to read the message. Grabbing your phone becomes associated with your phone buzzing. 


Problem phase 


1. Cue: You are answering emails. 


2. Craving: You begin to feel stressed and overwhelmed by work. You want to feel in control. 


Solution phase 


3. Response: You bite your nails. 


4. Reward: You satisfy your craving to reduce stress. Biting your nails becomes associated with answering email. 


Problem phase 


1. Cue: You wake up. 
2. Craving: You want to feel ale 


Solution phase 


3. Response: You drink a cup of coffee. 


4. Reward: You satisfy your craving to feel alert. Drinking coffee becomes associated with waking up. 


Problem phase 


1. Cue: You smell a doughnut shop as you walk down the street near your office. 


2. Craving: You begin to crave a doughnut) 


Solution phase 


3. Response: You buy a doughnut and eat it. 


4. Reward: You satisfy your craving to eat a doughnut. Buying a doughnut becomes associated with walking down the street near your office. 


1. Cue: You hit a stumbling block on a project at work. 


2. Craving: You feel stuck and want to relieve your frustration. 


Problem phase 


Solution phase 


3. Response: You pull out your phone and check social media. 


4. Reward: You satisfy your craving to feel relieved. Checking social media becomes associated with feeling stalled at work. 


Problem phase 


1. Cue: You walk into a dark room. 


2. Craving: You want to be able to see. 


Solution phase 


3. Response: You flip the light switch. 


4. Reward: You satisfy your craving to see. Turning on the light switch becomes associated with being in a dark room. 


By the time we become adults, we rarely notice the habits that are running our 
lives. Most of us never give a second thought to the fact that we tie the same 
shoe first each morning, or unplug the toaster after each use, or always change 
into comfortable clothes after getting home from work. After decades of mental 
programming, we automatically slip into these patterns of thinking and acting. 


THE FOUR LAWS OF BEHAVIOR CHANGE 


In the following chapters, we will see time and again how the four stages of cue, 
craving, response, and reward influence nearly everything we do each day. But 
before we do that, we need to transform these four steps into a practical 
framework that we can use to design good habits and eliminate bad ones. 

I refer to this framework as the Four Laws of Behavior Change, and it 
provides a simple set of rules for creating good habits and breaking bad ones. 
You can think of each law as a lever that influences human behavior. When the 
levers are in the right positions, creating good habits is effortless. When they are 
in the wrong positions, it is nearly impossible. 


How to Create a Good Habit 


We can invert these laws to learn how to break a bad habit. 


How to Break a Bad Habi 


It would be irresponsible for me to claim that these four laws are an 
exhaustive framework for changing any human behavior, but I think they’re 
close. As you will soon see, the Four Laws of Behavior Change apply to nearly 
every field, from sports to politics, art to medicine, comedy to management. 
These laws can be used no matter what challenge you are facing. There is no 
need for completely different strategies for each habit. 

Whenever you want to change your behavior, you can simply ask yourself: 





If you have ever wondered, “Why don’t I do what I say I’m going to do? Why 
don’t I lose the weight or stop smoking or save for retirement or start that side 
business? Why do I say something is important but never seem to make time for 
it?” The answers to those questions can be found somewhere in these four laws. 


The key to creating good habits and breaking bad ones is to understand these 
fundamental laws and how to alter them to your specifications. Every goal is 
doomed to fail if it goes against the grain of human nature. 

Your habits are shaped by the systems in your life. In the chapters that follow, 
we will discuss these laws one by one and show how you can use them to create 
a system in which good habits emerge naturally and bad habits wither away. 


THE 1ST LAW 


Make It Obvious 


4 
The Man Who Didn’t Look Right 


TH. esycuotocist Gary Klein once told me a story about a woman who attended a 


family gathering. She had spent years working as a paramedic and, upon arriving 
at the event, took one look at her father-in-law and got very concerned. 

“T don’t like the way you look,” she said. 

Her father-in-law, who was feeling perfectly fine, jokingly replied, “Well, I 
don’t like your looks, either.” 

“No,” she insisted. “You need to go to the hospital now.” 

A few hours later, the man was undergoing lifesaving surgery after an 
examination had revealed that he had a blockage to a major artery and was at 
immediate risk of a heart attack. Without his daughter-in-law’s intuition, he 
could have died. 

What did the paramedic see? How did she predict his impending heart attack? 

When major arteries are obstructed, the body focuses on sending blood to 
critical organs and away from peripheral locations near the surface of the skin. 
The result is a change in the pattern of distribution of blood in the face. After 
many years of working with people with heart failure, the woman had 
unknowingly developed the ability to recognize this pattern on sight. She 
couldn’t explain what it was that she noticed in her father-in-law’s face, but she 
knew something was wrong. 

Similar stories exist in other fields. For example, military analysts can identify 
which blip on a radar screen is an enemy missile and which one is a plane from 
their own fleet even though they are traveling at the same speed, flying at the 
same altitude, and look identical on radar in nearly every respect. During the 
Gulf War, Lieutenant Commander Michael Riley saved an entire battleship 
when he ordered a missile shot down—despite the fact that it looked exactly like 
the battleship’s own planes on radar. He made the right call, but even his 
superior officers couldn’t explain how he did it. 


Museum curators have been known to discern the difference between an 
authentic piece of art and an expertly produced counterfeit even though they 
can’t tell you precisely which details tipped them off. Experienced radiologists 
can look at a brain scan and predict the area where a stroke will develop before 
any obvious signs are visible to the untrained eye. I’ve even heard of 
hairdressers noticing whether a client is pregnant based only on the feel of her 
hair. 

The human brain is a prediction machine. It is continuously taking in your 
surroundings and analyzing the information it comes across. Whenever you 
experience something repeatedly—like a paramedic seeing the face of a heart 
attack patient or a military analyst seeing a missile on a radar screen—your brain 
begins noticing what is important, sorting through the details and highlighting 
the relevant cues, and cataloging that information for future use. 

With enough practice, you can pick up on the cues that predict certain 
outcomes without consciously thinking about it. Automatically, your brain 
encodes the lessons learned through experience. We can’t always explain what it 
is we are learning, but learning is happening all along the way, and your ability 
to notice the relevant cues in a given situation is the foundation for every habit 
you have. 

We underestimate how much our brains and bodies can do without thinking. 
You do not tell your hair to grow, your heart to pump, your lungs to breathe, or 
your stomach to digest. And yet your body handles all this and more on 
autopilot. You are much more than your conscious self. 

Consider hunger. How do you know when you’re hungry? You don’t 
necessarily have to see a cookie on the counter to realize that it is time to eat. 
Appetite and hunger are governed nonconsciously. Your body has a variety of 
feedback loops that gradually alert you when it is time to eat again and that track 
what is going on around you and within you. Cravings can arise thanks to 
hormones and chemicals circulating through your body. Suddenly, you’re 
hungry even though you’re not quite sure what tipped you off. 

This is one of the most surprising insights about our habits: you don’t need to 
be aware of the cue for a habit to begin. You can notice an opportunity and take 
action without dedicating conscious attention to it. This is what makes habits 
useful. 

It’s also what (makes) them dangerous. As habits form, your actions come 
under the direction of your automatic and nonconscious mind. You fall into old 
patterns before you realize what’s happening. Unless someone points it out, you 
may not notice that you cover your mouth with your hand whenever you laugh, 
that you apologize before asking a question, or that you have a habit of finishing 


other people’s sentences. And the more you repeat these patterns, the less likely 
you become to question what you’re doing and why you’re doing it. 

I once heard of a retail clerk who was instructed to cut up empty gift cards 
after customers had used up the balance on the card. One day, the clerk cashed 
out a few customers in a row who purchased with gift cards. When the next 
person walked up, the clerk swiped the customer’s actual credit card, picked up 
the scissors, and then cut it in half—entirely on autopilot—before looking up at 
the stunned customer and realizing what had just happened. 

Another woman I came across in my research was a former preschool teacher 
who had switched to a corporate job. Even though she was now working with 
adults, her old habits would kick in and she kept asking coworkers if they had 
washed their hands after going to the bathroom. I also found the story of a man 
who had spent years working as a lifeguard and would occasionally yell “Walk!” 
whenever he saw a child running. 

Over time, the cues that spark our habits become so common that they are 
essentially invisible: the treats on the kitchen counter, the remote control next to 
the couch, the phone in our pocket. Our responses to these cues are so deeply 


encoded that it may feel like the urge to act comes from nowhere. For this 


(Before we can effectively build new habits, we need to get a handle on our 
current ones. This can be more challenging than it sounds because once a habit is 
firmly rooted in your life, it is mostly nonconscious and automatic. If a habit 
remains mindless, you can’t expect to improve it. As the psychologist Carl Jung 
said, “Until you make the unconscious conscious, it will direct your life and you 
will call it fate.” 





THE HABITS SCORECARD 


The Japanese railway system is regarded as one of the best in the world. If you 
ever find yourself riding a train in Tokyo, you’ll notice that the conductors have 
a peculiar habit. 

As each operator runs the train, they proceed through a ritual of pointing at 
different objects and calling out commands. When the train approaches a signal, 
the operator will point at it and say, “Signal is green.” As the train pulls into and 
out of each station, the operator will point at the speedometer and call out the 
exact speed. When it’s time to leave, the operator will point at the timetable and 
State the time. Out on the platform, other employees are performing similar 
actions. Before each train departs, staff members will point along the edge of the 


platform and declare, “All clear!” Every detail is identified, pointed at, and 
named aloud.* 

This process, known as Pointing-and-Calling, is a safety system designed to 
reduce mistakes. It seems silly, but it works incredibly well. Pointing-and- 
Calling reduces errors by up to 85 percent and cuts accidents by 30 percent. The 
MTA subway system in New York City adopted a modified version that is 
“point-only,” and “within two years of implementation, incidents of incorrectly 
berthed subways fell 57 percent.” 

Pointing-and-Calling is so effective because it raises the level of awareness 
from a nonconscious habit to a more conscious level. Because the train operators 
must use their eyes, hands, mouth, and ears, they are more likely to notice 
problems before something goes wrong. 

My wife does something similar. Whenever we are preparing to walk out the 
door for a trip, she verbally calls out the most essential items in her packing list. 
“T’ve got my keys. I’ve got my wallet. I’ve got my glasses. I’ve got my 
husband.” 

The more automatic a behavior becomes, the less likely we are to consciously 
think about it. And when we’ve done something a thousand times before, we 
begin to overlook things. We assume that the next time will be just like the last. 
We’re so used to doing what we’ve always done that we don’t stop to question 
whether it’s the right thing to do at all. Many of our failures in performance are 
largely attributable to a lack of self-awareness. 

One of our greatest challenges in changing habits is maintaining awareness of 
what we are actually doing. This helps explain why the consequences of bad 


habits can sneak up on us. We need a (*poirit=aiid=all” System for our persomal 
















Here’s a sample of where your list might start: 


Wake up 

Turn off alarm 
Check my phone 
Go to the bathroom 
Weigh myself 
Take a shower 
Brush my teeth 
Floss my teeth 


Put on deodorant 
Hang up towel to dry 
Get dressed 

Make a cup of tea 


...and so on. 

Once you have a full list, look at each behavior, and ask yourself, “Is this a 
good habit, a bad habit, or a neutral habit?” If it is a good habit, write “+” next to 
it. If it is a bad habit, write “—”. If it is a neutral habit, write “=”. 

For example, the list above might look like this: 


Wake up = 

Turn off alarm = 
Check my phone — 
Go to the bathroom = 
Weigh myself + 
Take a shower + 
Brush my teeth + 
Floss my teeth + 

Put on deodorant + 
Hang up towel to dry = 
Get dressed = 

Make a cup of tea + 


The marks you give to a particular habit will depend on your situation and 
your goals. For someone who is trying to lose weight, eating a bagel with peanut 
butter every morning might be a bad habit. For someone who is trying to bulk up 
and add muscle, the same behavior might be a good habit. It all depends on what 
you’re working toward.* 

Scoring your habits can be a bit more complex for another reason as well. The 
labels “good habit” and “bad habit” are slightly inaccurate. There are no good 
habits or bad habits. There are only effective habits. That is, effective at solving 
problems. All habits serve you in some way—even the bad ones—which is why 
you repeat them. For this exercise, categorize your habits by how they will 
benefit you in the long run. Generally speaking, good habits will have net 
positive outcomes. Bad habits have net negative outcomes. Smoking a cigarette 


may reduce stress right now (that’s how it’s serving you), but it’s not a healthy 
long-term behavior. 

If you’re still having trouble determining how to rate a particular habit, here is 
a question I like to use: “Does this behavior help me become the type of person I 
wish to be? Does this habit cast a vote for or against my desired identity?” 
Habits that reinforce your desired identity are usually good. Habits that conflict 
with your desired identity are usually bad. 

As you create your Habits Scorecard, there is no need to change anything at 
first. The goal is to simply notice what is actually going on. Observe your 
thoughts and actions without judgment or internal criticism. Don’t blame 
yourself for your faults. Don’t praise yourself for your successes. 

If you eat a chocolate bar every morning, acknowledge it, almost as if you 
were watching someone else. Oh, how interesting that they would do such a 
thing. If you binge-eat, simply notice that you are eating more calories than you 
should. If you waste time online, notice that you are spending your life in a way 
that you do not want to. 

The first step to changing bad habits is to be on the lookout for them. If yow 










life. Say out loud the action that you are thinking of taking and what the outcome 
(will be} If you want to cut back on your junk food habit but notice yourself 
grabbing another cookie, say out loud, “I’m about to eat this cookie, but I don’t 
need it. Eating it will cause me to gain weight and hurt my health.” 

Hearing your bad habits spoken aloud makes the consequences seem more 
real. It adds weight to the action rather than letting yourself mindlessly slip into 
an old routine. This approach is useful even if you’re simply trying to remember 
a task on your to-do list. Just saying out loud, “Tomorrow, I need to go to the 
post office after lunch,” increases the odds that you’ll actually do it. You’re 
getting yourself to acknowledge the need for action—and that can make all the 
difference. 

The process of behavior change always starts with awareness. Strategies like 
Pointing-and-Calling and the Habits Scorecard are focused on getting you to 
recognize your habits and acknowledge the cues that trigger them, which makes 
it possible to respond in a way that benefits you. 


5 
The Best Way to Start a New Habit 


I. 2001) RESEARCHERS in Great Britain began working with 248 people to build better 


exercise habits over the course of two weeks. The subjects were divided into 
three groups. 

The first group was the control group. They were simply asked to track how 
often they exercised. 

The second group was the “motivation” group. They were asked not only to 
track their workouts but also to read some material on the benefits of exercise. 
The researchers also explained to the group how exercise could reduce the risk 
of coronary heart disease and improve heart health. 

Finally, there was the third group. These subjects received the same 
presentation as the second group, which ensured that they had equal levels of 
motivation. However, they were also asked to formulate a plan for when and 
where they would exercise over the following week. Specifically, each member 
of the third group completed the following sentence: “During the next week, I 
will partake in at least 20 minutes of vigorous exercise on [DAY] at [TIME] in 
[PLACE].” 

In the first and second groups, 35 to 38 percent of people exercised at least 
once per week. (Interestingly, the motivational presentation given to the second 
group seemed to have no meaningful impact on behavior.) But 91 percent of the 
third group exercised at least once per week—more than double the normal rate. 

The sentence they filled out is what researchers refer to as an implementation 
intention, which is a plan you make beforehand about when and where to act. 
That is, how you intend to implement a particular habit. 

The cues that can trigger a habit come in a wide range of forms—the feel of 
your phone buzzing in your pocket, the smell of chocolate chip cookies, the 
sound of ambulance sirens—but the two most common cues are time and 
location. Implementation intentions leverage both of these cues. 


Broadly speaking, the format for creating an implementation intention is: 
“When situation X arises, I will perform response Y.” 


Hundreds of studies have shown that implementation intentions are effective 
for sticking to our goals, whether it’s writing down the exact time and date of 
when you will get a flu shot or recording the time of your colonoscopy 
appointment. They increase the odds that people will stick with habits like 
recycling, studying, going to sleep early, and stopping smoking. 

Researchers have even found that voter turnout increases when people are 
forced to create implementation intentions by answering questions like: “What 
route are you taking to the polling station? At what time are you planning to go? 
What bus will get you there?” Other successful government programs have 
prompted citizens to make a clear plan to send taxes in on time or provided 
directions on when and where to pay late traffic bills. 

The punch line is clear: people who make a specific plan for when and where 
they will perform a new habit are more likely to follow through. Too many 
people try to change their habits without these basic details figured out. We tell 
ourselves, “I’m going to eat healthier” or “I’m going to write more,” but we 
never say when and where these habits are going to happen. We leave it up to 
chance and hope that we will “just remember to do it” or feel motivated at the 
right time. An implementation intention sweeps away foggy notions like “I want 
to work out more” or “I want to be more productive” or “I should vote” and 
transforms them into a concrete plan of action. 

Many people think they lack motivation when what they really lack is clarity. 
It is not always obvious when and where to take action. Some people spend their 
entire lives waiting for the time to be right to make an improvement. 

Once an implementation intention has been set, you don’t have to wait for 
inspiration to strike. Do I write a chapter today or not? Do I meditate this 
morning or at lunch? When the moment of action occurs, there is no need to 
make a decision. Simply follow your predetermined plan. 


The simple way to apply this strategy to your habits is to fill out this 
sentence: 
I will [BEHAVIOR] at [TIME] in [LOCATION]. 


° Meditation. I will meditate for one minute at 7 a.m. in my kitchen. 


° Studying. I will study Spanish for twenty minutes at 6 p.m. in my 


bedroom. 
° Exercise. I will exercise for one hour at 5 p.m. in my local gym. 
° Marriage. I will make my partner a cup of tea at 8 a.m. in the kitchen. 


If you aren’t sure when to start your habit, try the first day of the week, 
month, or year. People are more likely to take action at those times because hope 
is usually higher. If we have hope, we have a reason to take action. A fresh start 
feels motivating. 

There is another benefit to implementation intentions. Being specific about 
what you want and how you will achieve it helps you say no to things that derail 
progress, distract your attention, and pull you off course. We often say yes to 
little requests because we are not clear enough about what we need to be doing 
instead. When your dreams are vague, it’s easy to rationalize little exceptions all 
day long and never get around to the specific things you need to do to succeed. 

Give your habits a time and a space to live in the world. The goal is to make 
the time and location so obvious that, with enough repetition, you get an urge to 
do the right thing at the right time, even if you can’t say why. As the writer 










There are many ways to use implementation intentions in your life and work. 
My favorite approach is one I learned from Stanford professor BJ Fogg and it is 
a strategy I refer to as habit stacking. 





HABIT STACKING: A SIMPLE PLAN TO OVERHAUL YOUR HABITS 


The French philosopher Denis Diderot lived nearly his entire life in poverty, but 
that all changed one day in 1765. 

Diderot’s daughter was about to be married and he could not afford to pay for 
the wedding. Despite his lack of wealth, Diderot was well known for his role as 
the co-founder and writer of Encyclopédie, one of the most comprehensive 
encyclopedias of the time. When Catherine the Great, the Empress of Russia, 
heard of Diderot’s financial troubles, her heart went out to him. She was a book 
lover and greatly enjoyed his encyclopedia. She offered to buy Diderot’s 
personal library for £1,000—more than $150,000 today.* Suddenly, Diderot had 
money to spare. With his new wealth, he not only paid for the wedding but also 


acquired a scarlet robe for himself. 

Diderot’s scarlet robe was beautiful. So beautiful, in fact, that he immediately 
noticed how out of place it seemed when surrounded by his more common 
possessions. He wrote that there was “no more coordination, no more unity, no 
more beauty” between his elegant robe and the rest of his stuff. 

Diderot soon felt the urge to upgrade his possessions. He replaced his rug with 
one from Damascus. He decorated his home with expensive sculptures. He 
bought a mirror to place above the mantel, and a better kitchen table. He tossed 
aside his old straw chair for a leather one. Like falling dominoes, one purchase 
led to the next. 

Diderot’s behavior is not uncommon. In fact, the tendency for one purchase to 
lead to another one has a name: the Diderot Effect. The Diderot Effect states that 
obtaining a new possession often creates a spiral of consumption that leads to 
additional purchases. 

You can spot this pattern everywhere. You buy a dress and have to get new 
shoes and earrings to match. You buy a couch and suddenly question the layout 
of your entire living room. You buy a toy for your child and soon find yourself 
purchasing all of the accessories that go with it. It’s a chain reaction of 
purchases. 

Many human behaviors follow this cycle. You often decide what to do next 
based on what you have just finished doing. Going to the bathroom leads to 
washing and drying your hands, which reminds you that you need to put the 
dirty towels in the laundry, so you add laundry detergent to the shopping list, and 
so on. No behavior happens in isolation. Each action becomes a cue that triggers 
the next behavior. 

Why is this important? 

When it comes to building new habits, you can use the connectedness of 
behavior to your advantage. One of the best ways to build a new habit is to 
identify a current habit you already do each day and then stack your new 
behavior on top. This is called habit stacking. 

Habit stacking is a special form of an implementation intention. Rather than 
pairing your new habit with a particular time and location, you pair it with a 
current habit. This method, which was created by BJ Fogg as part of his Tiny 
Habits program, can be used to design an obvious cue for nearly any habit.* 


The habit stacking formula is: 
“After [CURRENT HABIT], I will [NEW HABIT.” 


For example: 


° Meditation. After I pour my cup of coffee each morning, I will 
meditate for one minute. 

° Exercise. After I take off my work shoes, I will immediately change 
into my workout clothes. 

° Gratitude. After I sit down to dinner, I will say one thing I’m grateful 
for that happened today. 

° Marriage. After I get into bed at night, I will give my partner a kiss. 

° Safety. After I put on my running shoes, I will text a friend or family 


member where I am running and how long it will take. 


The key is to tie your desired behavior into something you already do each 
day. Once you have mastered this basic structure, you can begin to create larger 
stacks by chaining small habits together. This allows you to take advantage of 
the natural momentum that comes from one behavior leading into the next—a 
positive version of the Diderot Effect. 


HABIT STACKING 


CUE CRAVING RESPONSE REWARD 


HABIT 1 [&gt;——_}—__+ 
HABIT 2 |________|-___+ 
HABIT 3 ff E 


er J 
4 
FIGURE 7: Habit stacking increases the likelihood that you’ll stick with a habit by stacking your new behavior on top of an old one. This process can be repeated to chain numerous habits 
together, each one acting as the cue for the next. 
Your morning routine habit stack might look like this: 
1. After I pour my morning cup of coffee, I will meditate for sixty 
seconds. 
2, After I meditate for sixty seconds, I will write my to-do list for the 
day. 
3. After I write my to-do list for the day, I will immediately begin my 
first task. 


Or, consider this habit stack in the evening: 


1. After I finish eating dinner, I will put my plate directly into the 


dishwasher. 
2: After I put my dishes away, I will immediately wipe down the counter. 
3. After I wipe down the counter, I will set out my coffee mug for 


tomorrow morning. 


You can also insert new behaviors into the middle of your current routines. 
For example, you may already have a morning routine that looks like this: Wake 
up &gt; Make my bed &gt; Take a shower. Let’s say you want to develop the habit of 
reading more each night. You can expand your habit stack and try something 
like: Wake up &gt; Make my bed &gt; Place a book on my pillow &gt; Take a shower. 
Now, when you climb into bed each night, a book will be sitting there waiting 
for you to enjoy. 

Overall, habit stacking allows you to create a set of simple rules that guide 
your future behavior. It’s like you always have a game plan for which action 
should come next. Once you get comfortable with this approach, you can 
develop general habit stacks to guide you whenever the situation is appropriate: 


° Exercise. When I see a set of stairs, I will take them instead of using 
the elevator. 

° Social skills. When I walk into a party, I will introduce myself to 
someone I don’t know yet. 

° Finances. When I want to buy something over $100, I will wait 
twenty-four hours before purchasing. 

° Healthy eating. When I serve myself a meal, I will always put veggies 
on my plate first. 

° Minimalism. When I buy a new item, I will give something away. 
(“One in, one out.”) 

° Mood. When the phone rings, I will take one deep breath and smile 
before answering. 

° Forgetfulness. When I leave a public place, I will check the table and 


chairs to make sure I don’t leave anything behind. 


No matter how you use this strategy, the secret to creating a successful habit 
stack is selecting the right cue to kick things off. Unlike an implementation 
intention, which specifically states the time and location for a given behavior, 


habit stacking implicitly has the time and location built into it. When and where 
you choose to insert a habit into your daily routine can make a big difference. If 
you’re trying to add meditation into your morning routine but mornings are 
chaotic and your kids keep running into the room, then that may be the wrong 
place and time. Consider when you are most likely to be successful. Don’t ask 
yourself to do a habit when you’re likely to be occupied with something else. 

Your cue should also have the same frequency as your desired habit. If you 
want to do a habit every day, but you stack it on top of a habit that only happens 
on Mondays, that’s not a good choice. 

One way to find the right trigger for your habit stack is by brainstorming a list 
of your current habits. You can use your Habits Scorecard from the last chapter 
as a Starting point. Alternatively, you can create a list with two columns. In the 
first column, write down the habits you do each day without fail.* 

For example: 


Get out of bed. 

Take a shower. 

Brush your teeth. 

Get dressed. 

Brew a cup of coffee. 
Eat breakfast. 

Take the kids to school. 
Start the work day. 

Eat lunch. 

End the work day. 
Change out of work clothes. 
Sit down for dinner. 
Turn off the lights. 

Get into bed. 


Your list can be much longer, but you get the idea. In the second column, 
write down all of the things that happen to you each day without fail. For 
example: 


° The sun rises. 
e You get a text message. 


° The song you are listening to ends. 
° The sun sets. 


Armed with these two lists, you can begin searching for the best place to layer 
your new habit into your lifestyle. 

Habit stacking works best when the cue is highly specific and immediately 
actionable. Many people select cues that are too vague. I made this mistake 
myself. When I wanted to start a push-up habit, my habit stack was “When I take 
a break for lunch, I will do ten push-ups.” At first glance, this sounded 
reasonable. But soon, I realized the trigger was unclear. Would I do my push-ups 
before I ate lunch? After I ate lunch? Where would I do them? After a few 
inconsistent days, I changed my habit stack to: “When I close my laptop for 
lunch, I will do ten push-ups next to my desk.” Ambiguity gone. 

Habits like “read more” or “eat better” are worthy causes, but these goals do 
not provide instruction on how and when to act. Be specific and clear: After I 
close the door. After I brush my teeth. After I sit down at the table. The 
specificity is important. The more tightly bound your new habit is to a specific 
cue, the better the odds are that you will notice when the time comes to act. 

The ist Law of Behavior Change is to make it obvious. Strategies like 
implementation intentions and habit stacking are among the most practical ways 
to create obvious cues for your habits and design a clear plan for when and 
where to take action. 


6 


Motivation Is Overrated; Environment Often 
Matters More 


AN. Thornowe, a primary care physician at Massachusetts General Hospital in 


Boston, had a crazy idea. She believed she could improve the eating habits of 
thousands of hospital staff and visitors without changing their willpower or 
motivation in the slightest way. In fact, she didn’t plan on talking to them at all. 

Thorndike and her colleagues designed a six-month study to alter the “choice 
architecture” of the hospital cafeteria. They started by changing how drinks were 
arranged in the room. Originally, the refrigerators located next to the cash 
registers in the cafeteria were filled with only soda. The researchers added water 
as an option to each one. Additionally, they placed baskets of bottled water next 
to the food stations throughout the room. Soda was still in the primary 
refrigerators, but water was now available at all drink locations. 

Over the next three months, the number of soda sales at the hospital dropped 
by 11.4 percent. Meanwhile, sales of bottled water increased by 25.8 percent. 
They made similar adjustments—and saw similar results—with the food in the 
cafeteria. Nobody had said a word to anyone eating there. 


BEFORE AFTER 





ENTRANCE ENTRANCE 


FIGURE 8: Here is a representation of what the cafeteria looked like before the environment design changes were made (left) and after (right). The shaded boxes indicate areas where bottled 
water was available in each instance. Because the amount of water in the environment was increased, behavior shifted naturally and without additional motivation. 


People often choose products not because of what they are, but because of 
where they are. If I walk into the kitchen and see a plate of cookies on the 
counter, Pll pick up half a dozen and start eating, even if I hadn’t been thinking 
about them beforehand and didn’t necessarily feel hungry. If the communal table 
at the office is always filled with doughnuts and bagels, it’s going to be hard not 
to grab one every now and then. Your habits change depending on the room you 
are in and the cues in front of you. 

Environment is the invisible hand that shapes human behavior. Despite our 
unique personalities, certain behaviors tend to arise again and again under 
certain environmental conditions. In church, people tend to talk in whispers. On 
a dark street, people act wary and guarded. In this way, the most common form 
of change is not internal, but external: we are changed by the world around us. 
Every habit is context dependent. 

In 1936, psychologist Kurt Lewin wrote a simple equation that makes a 
powerful statement: Behavior is a function of the Person in their Environment, 
or B = f (P,E). 

It didn’t take long for Lewin’s Equation to be tested in business. In 1952, the 
economist Hawkins Stern described a phenomenon he called Suggestion Impulse 
Buying, which “is triggered when a shopper sees a product for the first time and 
visualizes a need for it.” In other words, customers will occasionally buy 
products not because they want them but because of how they are presented to 


them. 

For example, items at eye level tend to be purchased more than those down 
near the floor. For this reason, you’ll find expensive brand names featured in 
easy-to-reach locations on store shelves because they drive the most profit, while 
cheaper alternatives are tucked away in harder-to-reach spots. The same goes for 
end caps, which are the units at the end of aisles. End caps are moneymaking 
machines for retailers because they are obvious locations that encounter a lot of 
foot traffic. For example, 45 percent of Coca-Cola sales come specifically from 
end-of-the-aisle racks. 

The more obviously available a product or service is, the more likely you are 
to try it. People drink Bud Light because it is in every bar and visit Starbucks 
because it is on every corner. We like to think that we are in control. If we 
choose water over soda, we assume it is because we wanted to do so. The truth, 
however, is that many of the actions we take each day are shaped not by 
purposeful drive and choice but by the most obvious option. 

Every living being has its own methods for sensing and understanding the 
world. Eagles have remarkable long-distance vision. Snakes can smell by 
“tasting the air” with their highly sensitive tongues. Sharks can detect small 
amounts of electricity and vibrations in the water caused by nearby fish. Even 
bacteria have chemoreceptors—tiny sensory cells that allow them to detect toxic 
chemicals in their environment. 

In humans, perception is directed by the sensory nervous system. We perceive 
the world through sight, sound, smell, touch, and taste. But we also have other 
ways of sensing stimuli. Some are conscious, but many are nonconscious. For 
instance, you can “notice” when the temperature drops before a storm, or when 
the pain in your gut rises during a stomachache, or when you fall off balance 
while walking on rocky ground. Receptors in your body pick up on a wide range 
of internal stimuli, such as the amount of salt in your blood or the need to drink 
when thirsty. 

The most powerful of all human sensory abilities, however, is vision. The 
human body has about eleven million sensory receptors. Approximately ten 
million of those are dedicated to sight. Some experts estimate that half of the 
brain’s resources are used on vision. Given that we are more dependent on vision 
than on any other sense, it should come as no surprise that visual cues are the 
greatest catalyst of our behavior. For this reason, a small change in what you see 
can lead to a big shift in what you do. As a result, you can imagine how 
important it is to live and work in environments that are filled with productive 
cues and devoid of unproductive ones. 

Thankfully, there is good news in this respect. You don’t have to be the victim 


of your environment. You can also be the architect of it. 


HOW TO DESIGN YOUR ENVIRONMENT FOR SUCCESS 


During the energy crisis and oil embargo of the 1970s, Dutch researchers began 
to pay close attention to the country’s energy usage. In one suburb near 
Amsterdam, they found that some homeowners used 30 percent less energy than 
their neighbors—despite the homes being of similar size and getting electricity 
for the same price. 

It turned out the houses in this neighborhood were nearly identical except for 
one feature: the location of the electrical meter. Some had one in the basement. 
Others had the electrical meter upstairs in the main hallway. As you may guess, 
the homes with the meters located in the main hallway used less electricity. 
When their energy use was obvious and easy to track, people changed their 
behavior. 

Every habit is initiated by a cue, and we are more likely to notice cues that 
stand out. Unfortunately, the environments where we live and work often make 
it easy not to do certain actions because there is no obvious cue to trigger the 
behavior. It’s easy not to practice the guitar when it’s tucked away in the closet. 
It’s easy not to read a book when the bookshelf is in the corner of the guest 
room. It’s easy not to take your vitamins when they are out of sight in the pantry. 
When the cues that spark a habit are subtle or hidden, they are easy to ignore. 

By comparison, creating obvious visual cues can draw your attention toward a 
desired habit. In the early 1990s, the cleaning staff at Schiphol Airport in 
Amsterdam installed a small sticker that looked like a fly near the center of each 
urinal. Apparently, when men stepped up to the urinals, they aimed for what they 
thought was a bug. The stickers improved their aim and significantly reduced 
“spillage” around the urinals. Further analysis determined that the stickers cut 
bathroom cleaning costs by 8 percent per year. 

I’ve experienced the power of obvious cues in my own life. I used to buy 
apples from the store, put them in the crisper in the bottom of the refrigerator, 
and forget all about them. By the time I remembered, the apples would have 
gone bad. I never saw them, so I never ate them. 

Eventually, I took my own advice and redesigned my environment. I bought a 
large display bowl and placed it in the middle of the kitchen counter. The next 
time I bought apples, that was where they went—out in the open where I could 
see them. Almost like magic, I began eating a few apples each day simply 
because they were obvious rather than out of sight. 


Here are a few ways you can redesign your environment and make the cues 
for your preferred habits more obvious: 







If you want to make a habit a big part of your life, make the cue a big part of 
your environment. The most persistent behaviors usually have multiple cues. 
Consider how many different ways a smoker could be prompted to pull out a 
cigarette: driving in the car, seeing a friend smoke, feeling stressed at work, and 
so On. 

The same strategy can be employed for good habits. By sprinkling triggers 
throughout your surroundings, you increase the odds that yov’ll think about your 
habit throughout the day. Make sure the best choice is the most obvious one. 
Making a better decision is easy and natural when the cues for good habits are 
right in front of you. 





Most people live in a world 
others have created for them. But you can alter the spaces where you live and 
work to increase your exposure to positive cues and reduce your exposure to 
negative ones. 











THE CONTEXT IS THE CUE 





For example, many people drink more in social situations than they would 
ever drink alone. The trigger is rarely a single cue, but rather the whole situation: 


watching your friends order drinks, hearing the music at the bar, seeing the beers 
on tap. 

We mentally assign our habits to the locations in which they occur: the home, 
the office, the gym. Each location develops a connection to certain habits and 
routines. You establish a particular relationship with the objects on your desk, 
the items on your kitchen counter, the things in your bedroom. 

Our behavior is not defined by the objects in the environment but by our 
relationship to them. In fact, this is a useful way to think about the influence of 
the environment on your behavior. Stop thinking about your environment as 
filled with objects. Start thinking about it as filled with relationships. Think in 
terms of how you interact with the spaces around you. For one person, her couch 
is the place where she reads for an hour each night. For someone else, the couch 
is where he watches television and eats a bowl of ice cream after work. Different 
people can have different memories—and thus different habits—associated with 
the same place. 

The good news? You can train yourself to link a particular habit with a 
particular context. 

In one study, 





‘The power of context also reveals an important strategy: habits can be easier 
to change in a new environment. It helps to escape the subtle triggers and cues 
that nudge you toward your current habits. Go to a new place—a different coffee 
shop, a bench in the park, a corner of your room you seldom use—and create a 
new routine there. 


you leave your behavioral 
biases behind. You aren’t battling old environmental cues, which allows new 
habits to form without interruption. 

Want to think more creatively? Move to a bigger room, a rooftop patio, or a 
building with expansive architecture. Take a break from the space where you do 
your daily work, which is also linked to your current thought patterns. 













When I started my career as an entrepreneur, I would often work from my 
couch or at the kitchen table. In the evenings, I found it very difficult to stop 
working. There was no clear division between the end of work time and the 
beginning of personal time. Was the kitchen table my office or the space where I 
ate meals? 





A few years later, I could finally afford to move to a home with a separate 
room for my office. Suddenly, work was something that happened “in here” and 


personal life was something that happened “out there.” It was easier for me to) 












Whenever possible, avoid mixing the context of one habit with another. When 
you start mixing contexts, you’ll start mixing habits—and the easier ones will 
usually win out. This is one reason why the versatility of modern technology is 
both a strength and a weakness. You can use your phone for all sorts of tasks, 
which makes it a powerful device. But when you can use your phone to do 
nearly anything, it becomes hard to associate it with one task. You want to be 
productive, but you’re also conditioned to browse social media, check email, and 
play video games whenever you open your phone. It’s a mishmash of cues. 

You may be thinking, “You don’t understand. I live in New York City. My 
apartment is the size of a smartphone. I need each room to play multiple roles.” 
Fair enough. If your space is limited, divide your room into activity zones: a 
chair for reading, a desk for writing, a table for eating. You can do the same with 
your digital spaces. I know a writer who uses his computer only for writing, his 
tablet only for reading, and his phone only for social media and texting. Every 
habit should have a home. 

If you can manage to stick with this strategy, each context will become 
associated with a particular habit and mode of thought. Habits thrive under 
predictable circumstances like these. Focus comes automatically when you are 
sitting at your work desk. Relaxation is easier when you are in a space designed 
for that purpose. Sleep comes quickly when it is the only thing that happens in 
your bedroom. If you want behaviors that are stable and predictable, you need an 


environment that is stable and predictable. 





Chapter Summary 





7 


The Secret to Self-Control 


I. wn, as the Vietnam War was heading into its sixteenth year, congressmen 


Robert Steele from Connecticut and Morgan Murphy from Illinois made a 
discovery that stunned the American public. While visiting the troops, they had 
learned that over 15 percent of U.S. soldiers stationed there were heroin addicts. 
Follow-up research revealed that 35 percent of service members in Vietnam had 
tried heroin and as many as 20 percent were addicted—the problem was even 
worse than they had initially thought. 

The discovery led to a flurry of activity in Washington, including the creation 
of the Special Action Office of Drug Abuse Prevention under President Nixon to 
promote prevention and rehabilitation and to track addicted service members 
when they returned home. 

Lee Robins was one of the researchers in charge. In a finding that completely 
upended the accepted beliefs about addiction, Robins found that when soldiers 
who had been heroin users returned home, only 5 percent of them became 
readdicted within a year, and just 12 percent relapsed within three years. In other 
words, approximately nine out of ten soldiers who used heroin in Vietnam 
eliminated their addiction nearly overnight. 

This finding contradicted the prevailing view at the time, which considered 
heroin addiction to be a permanent and irreversible condition. Instead, Robins 
revealed that addictions could spontaneously dissolve if there was a radical 
change in the environment. In Vietnam, soldiers spent all day surrounded by 
cues triggering heroin use: it was easy to access, they were engulfed by the 
constant stress of war, they built friendships with fellow soldiers who were also 
heroin users, and they were thousands of miles from home. Once a soldier 
returned to the United States, though, he found himself in an environment devoid 
of those triggers. When the context changed, so did the habit. 

Compare this situation to that of a typical drug user. Someone becomes 


addicted at home or with friends, goes to a clinic to get clean—which is devoid 
of all the environmental stimuli that prompt their habit—then returns to their old 
neighborhood with all of their previous cues that caused them to get addicted in 
the first place. It’s no wonder that usually you see numbers that are the exact 
opposite of those in the Vietnam study. Typically, 90 percent of heroin users 
become readdicted once they return home from rehab. 

The Vietnam studies ran counter to many of our cultural beliefs about bad 
habits because it challenged the conventional association of unhealthy behavior 
as a moral weakness. If you’re overweight, a smoker, or an addict, you’ve been 
told your entire life that it is because you lack self-control—maybe even that 
you’re a bad person. |The idea that a little bit of discipline would solve all our 
problems is deeply embedded in our culture. 

Recent research, however, shows something different. When scientists 
analyze people who appear to have tremendous self-control, it turns out those 
individuals aren’t all that different from those who are struggling. Instead, 
“disciplined” people are better at structuring their lives in a way that does not 


require heroic willpower and self-control/In other words, they spend less time in 


The people with the best self-control are typically the ones who need to use it 
the least. It’s easier to practice self-restraint when you don’t have to use it very 


often. So, yes, perseverance, grit, and willpower are essential to success, but the 
way to improve these qualities is not by wishing you were a more disciplined 
person, but by creating a more disciplined environment. 


This counterintuitive idea makes even more sense once you understand what 
happens when a habit is formed in the brain. A habit that has been encoded in 
the mind is ready to be used whenever the relevant situation arises. When Patty 
Olwell, a therapist from Austin, Texas, started smoking, she would often light up 
while riding horses with a friend. Eventually, she quit smoking and avoided it 
for years. She had also stopped riding. Decades later, she hopped on a horse 
again and found herself craving a cigarette for the first time in forever. The cues 
were still internalized; she just hadn’t been exposed to them in a long time. 

Once a habit has been encoded, the urge to act follows whenever the 
environmental cues reappear. This is one reason behavior change techniques can 
backfire. Shaming obese people tations « them 















they try to numb. You feel bad, so you eat junk food. Because you eat junk food, 
you feel bad. Watching television makes you feel sluggish, so you watch more 
television because you don’t have the energy to do anything else. Worrying 
about your health makes you feel anxious, which causes you to smoke to ease 
your anxiety, which makes your health even worse and soon you’re feeling more 
anxious. It’s a downward spiral, a runaway train of bad habits. 

Researchers refer to this phenomenon as “cue-induced wanting”: an external 
trigger causes a compulsive craving to repeat a bad habit. Once you notice 
something, you begin to want it. This process is happening all the time—often 
without us realizing it. Scientists have found that showing addicts a picture of 
cocaine for just thirty-three milliseconds stimulates the reward pathway in the 
brain and sparks desire. This speed is too fast for the brain to consciously 
register—the addicts couldn’t even tell you what they had seen—but they craved 
the drug all the same. 

Here’s the punch line: You can break a habit, but you’re unlikely to forget it. 
Once the mental grooves of habit have been carved into your brain, they are 
nearly impossible to remove entirely—even if they go unused for quite a while. 
And that means that simply resisting temptation is an ineffective strategy. It is 
hard to maintain a Zen attitude in a life filled with interruptions. It takes too 
much energy. In the short-run, you can choose to overpower temptation. In the 
long-run, we become a product of the environment that we live in. To put it 
bluntly, I have never seen someone consistently stick to positive habits in a 
negative environment. 

A more reliable approach is to cut bad habits off at the source. One of the 
most practical ways to eliminate a bad habit is to reduce exposure to the cue that 
causes it. 


° If you can’t seem to get any work done, leave your phone in another 
room for a few hours. 

° If you’re continually feeling like you’re not enough, stop following 
social media accounts that trigger jealousy and envy. 

° If you’re wasting too much time watching television, move the TV out 
of the bedroom. 

° If you’re spending too much money on electronics, quit reading 
reviews of the latest tech gear. 

° If yov’re playing too many video games, unplug the console and put it 


in a closet after each use. 


This practice is an inversion of the 1st Law of Behavior Change. Rather than 
make it obvious, you can make it invisible. I’m often surprised by how effective 
simple changes like these can be. Remove a single cue and the entire habit often 
fades away. 

Self-control is a short-term strategy, not a long-term one. You may be able to 
resist temptation once or twice, but it’s unlikely you can muster the willpower to 
override your desires every time. Instead of summoning a new dose of willpower 
whenever you want to do the right thing, your energy would be better spent 
optimizing your env
ironment. This is the secret to self-control. Make the cues of 
your good habits obvious and the cues of your bad habits invisible. 


Chapter Summary 


T 





HOW TO CREATE A GOOD HABIT 


Make It Obvious 


The 2nd La 
The 3rd Lawg@Make It Easy 
he 4th Lawg@Make It Satisfying 


HOW TO BREAK A BAD HABIT 


Inversion of the 1st LawmMake It Invisible 


1.5: Reduce exposure. Remove the cues of your bad habits from your environment. 
Inversion of the 2nd Law™Make It Unattractive 
Inversion of the 3rd Law™Make It Difficul 


Inversion of the 4th Lawg™Make It Unsatisfying 


You can download a printable version of this habits cheat sheet at: atomichabits.com/cheatsheet 


THE 2ND LAW 


Make It Attractive 


8 


How to Make a Habit Irresistible 


I, me 10s, A Dutch scientist named Niko Tinbergen performed a series of 


experiments that transformed our understanding of what motivates us. Tinbergen 
—who eventually won a Nobel Prize for his work—was investigating herring 
gulls, the gray and white birds often seen flying along the seashores of North 
America. 

Adult herring gulls have a small red dot on their beak, and Tinbergen noticed 
that newly hatched chicks would peck this spot whenever they wanted food. To 
begin one experiment, he created a collection of fake cardboard beaks, just a 
head without a body. When the parents had flown away, he went over to the nest 
and offered these dummy beaks to the chicks. The beaks were obvious fakes, 
and he assumed the baby birds would reject them altogether. 

However, when the tiny gulls saw the red spot on the cardboard beak, they 
pecked away just as if it were attached to their own mother. They had a clear 
preference for those red spots—as if they had been genetically programmed at 
birth. Soon Tinbergen discovered that the bigger the red spot, the faster the 
chicks pecked. Eventually, he created a beak with three large red dots on it. 
When he placed it over the nest, the baby birds went crazy with delight. They 
pecked at the little red patches as if it was the greatest beak they had ever seen. 

Tinbergen and his colleagues discovered similar behavior in other animals. 
For example, the greylag goose is a ground-nesting bird. Occasionally, as the 
mother moves around on the nest, one of the eggs will roll out and settle on the 
grass nearby. Whenever this happens, the goose will waddle over to the egg and 
use its beak and neck to pull it back into the nest. 

Tinbergen discovered that the goose will pull any nearby round object, such as 
a billiard ball or a lightbulb, back into the nest. The bigger the object, the greater 
their response. One goose even made a tremendous effort to roll a volleyball 
back and sit on top. Like the baby gulls automatically pecking at red dots, the 


greylag goose was following an instinctive rule: When I see a round object 
nearby, I must roll it back into the nest. The bigger the round object, the harder I 
should try to get it. 





Christmas tree. Scientists refer to these exaggerated cues as supernormal stimuli. 
A ike a beak with 


three red dots or an egg the size of a volleyball—and it elicits a stronger 
response than usual. 

‘Humans are also prone to fall for exaggerated versions of reality. Junk food, 
for example, drives our reward systems into a frenzy. After spending hundreds 
of thousands of years hunting and foraging for food in the wild, the human brain 
has evolved to place a high value on salt, sugar, and fat. Such foods are often 
calorie-dense and they were quite rare when our ancient ancestors were roaming 
the savannah. When you don’t know where your next meal is coming from, 
eating as much as possible is an excellent strategy for survival. 

Today, however, we live in a calorie-rich environment. Food is abundant, but 
your brain continues to crave it like it is scarce. Placing a high value on salt, 
sugar, and fat is no longer advantageous to our health, but the craving persists 
because the brain’s reward centers have not changed for approximately fifty 
thousand years. The modern food industry relies on stretching our Paleolithic 
instincts beyond their evolutionary purpose. 

A primary goal of food science is to create products that are more attractive to 
consumers. Nearly every food in a bag, box, or jar has been enhanced in some 
way, if only with additional flavoring. Companies spend millions of dollars to 
discover the most satisfying level of crunch in a potato chip or the perfect 
amount of fizz in a soda. Entire departments are dedicated to optimizing how a 
product feels in your mouth—a quality known as orosensation. French fries, for 
example, are a potent combination—golden brown and crunchy on the outside, 
light and smooth on the inside. 

Other processed foods enhance dynamic contrast, which refers to items with a 
combination of sensations, like crunchy and creamy. Imagine the gooeyness of 
melted cheese on top of a crispy pizza crust, or the crunch of an Oreo cookie 
combined with its smooth center. With natural, unprocessed foods, you tend to 
experience the same sensations over and over—how’s that seventeenth bite of 
kale taste? After a few minutes, your brain loses interest and you begin to feel 
full. But foods that are high in dynamic contrast keep the experience novel and 
interesting, encouraging you to eat more. 

Ultimately, such strategies enable food scientists to find the “bliss point” for 








each product—the precise combination of salt, sugar, and fat that excites your 
brain and keeps you coming back for more. The result, of course, is that you 
overeat because hyperpalatable foods are more attractive to the human brain. As 
Stephan Guyenet, a neuroscientist who specializes in eating behavior and 
obesity, says, “We’ve gotten too good at pushing our own buttons.” 





Look around. Society is filled with highly engineered versions of reality that 
are more attractive than the world our ancestors evolved in. Stores feature 


mannequins with exaggerated hips and breasts to sell clothes. Social media 
delivers more “likes” and praise in a few minutes than we could ever get in the 
office or at home. Online porn splices together stimulating scenes at a rate that 
would be impossible to replicate in real life. Advertisements are created with a 
combination of ideal lighting, professional makeup, and Photoshopped edits— 
even the model doesn’t look like the person in the final image. These are the 
supernormal stimuli of our modern world. They exaggerate features that are 
naturally attractive to us, and our instincts go wild as a result, driving us into 
excessive shopping habits, social media habits, porn habits, eating habits, and 
many others. 

If history serves as a guide, the opportunities of the future will be more 
attractive than those of today. The trend is for rewards to become more 
concentrated and stimuli to become more enticing. Junk food is a more 
concentrated form of calories than natural foods. Hard liquor is a more 
concentrated form of alcohol than beer. Video games are a more concentrated 
form of play than board games. Compared to nature, these pleasure-packed 
experiences are hard to resist. We have the brains of our ancestors but 
temptations they never had to face. 

If you want to increase the odds that a behavior will occur, then you need to 
make it attractive. 








We begin by ex 
(dopamine spike. 





THE DOPAMINE-DRIVEN FEEDBACK LOOP 


Scientists can track the precise moment a craving occurs by measuring a 
neurotransmitter called dopamine.* The importance of dopamine became 
apparent in 1954 when the neuroscientists James Olds and Peter Milner ran an 
experiment that revealed the neurological processes behind craving and desire. 
By implanting electrodes in the brains of rats, the researchers blocked the release 
of dopamine. To the surprise of the scientists, the rats lost all will to live. They 
wouldn’t eat. They wouldn’t have sex. They didn’t crave anything. Within a few 
days, the animals died of thirst. 

In follow-up studies, other scientists also inhibited the dopamine-releasing 
parts of the brain, but this time, they squirted little droplets of sugar into the 
mouths of the dopamine-depleted rats. Their little rat faces lit up with 
pleasurable grins from the tasty substance. Even though dopamine was blocked, 
they liked the sugar just as much as before; they just didn’t want it anymore. (The 


When other researchers reversed this process and flooded the reward system 
of the brain with dopamine, animals performed habits at breakneck speed. In one 
study, mice received a powerful hit of dopamine each time they poked their nose 
in a box. Within minutes, the mice developed a craving so strong they began 
poking their nose into the box eight hundred times per hour. (Humans are not so 
different: the average slot machine player will spin the wheel six hundred times 
per hour.) 


Habits are a dopamine-driven feedback loop. Every behavior that is highly 
+habit-forming—taking drugs, eating junk food, playing video games, browsing 
social media—is associated with higher levels of dopamine. The same can be 
said for our most basic habitual behaviors like eating food, drinking water, 
having sex, and interacting socially. 


When it comes to habits, the key takeaway is this: 
















Gambling 
addicts have a dopamine spike right before they place a bet, not after they win. 
Cocaine addicts get a surge of dopamine when they see the powder, not after 
they take it. Whenever you predict that an opportunity will be rewarding, your 
levels of dopamine spike in anticipation. And whenever dopamine rises, so does 
your motivation to act. 


(It is the anticipation of a reward—not the fulfillment of it—that gets us to take 


action. 

Interestingly, the reward system that is activated in the brain when you receive 
a reward is the same system that is activated when you anticipate a reward. This 
is one reason the anticipation of an experience can often feel better than the 





THE DOPAMINE SPIKE 


CRAVING [RESPONSE] REWARD 





D) 


FIGURE 9: Before a habit is learned (A), dopamine is released when the reward is experienced for the first time. The next time around (B), dopamine rises before taking action, immediately 
after a cue is recognized. This spike leads to a feeling of desire and a craving to take action whenever the cue is spotted. Once a habit is learned, dopamine will not rise when a reward is 
experienced because you already expect the reward. However, if you see a cue and expect a reward, but do not get one, then dopamine will drop in disappointment (C). The sensitivity of the 
dopamine response can clearly be seen when a reward is provided late (D). First, the cue is identified and dopamine rises as a craving builds. Next, a response is taken but the reward does not 
come as quickly as expected and dopamine begins to drop. Finally, when the reward comes a little later than you had hoped, dopamine spikes again. It is as if the brain is saying, “See! I 
knew I was right. Don’t forget to repeat this action next time.” 


Your brain has far more neural circuitry allocated for wanting rewards than 
for liking them. The wanting centers in the brain are large: the brain stem, the 
nucleus accumbens, the ventral tegmental area, the dorsal striatum, the 





amygdala, and portions of the prefrontal cortex. By comparison, the liking 





The fact that the brain allocates so much precious space to the regions 
responsible for craving and desire provides further evidence of the crucial role 
these processes play. 










These insights reveal the importance of the 2nd Law of Behavior Change. We) 





HOW TO USE TEMPTATION BUNDLING TO MAKE YOUR HABITS 
MORE ATTRACTIVE 


Ronan Byrne, an electrical engineering student in Dublin, Ireland, enjoyed 
watching Netflix, but he also knew that he should exercise more often than he 
did. Putting his engineering skills to use, Byrne hacked his stationary bike and 
connected it to his laptop and television. Then he wrote a computer program that 
would allow Netflix to run only if he was cycling at a certain speed. If he slowed 
down for too long, whatever show he was watching would pause until he started 
pedaling again. He was, in the words of one fan, “eliminating obesity one Netflix 
binge at a time.” 

He was also employing temptation bundling to make his exercise habit more 
attractive. Temptation bundling works by linking an action you want to do with 
an action you need to do. In Byrne’s case, 


Businesses are masters at temptation bundling. For instance, when the 
American Broadcasting Company, more commonly known as ABC, launched its 
Thursday-night television lineup for the 2014—2015 season, they promoted 
temptation bundling on a massive scale. 

Every Thursday, the company would air three shows created by screenwriter 
Shonda Rhimes—Grey’s Anatomy, Scandal, and How to Get Away with Murder. 
They branded it as “T'GIT on ABC” (TGIT stands for Thank God It’s Thursday). 


In addition to promoting the shows, ABC encouraged viewers to make popcorn, 
drink red wine, and enjoy the evening. 

Andrew Kubitz, head of scheduling for ABC, described the idea behind the 
campaign: “We see Thursday night as a viewership opportunity, with either 
couples or women by themselves who want to sit down and escape and have fun 
and drink their red wine and have some popcorn.” The brilliance of this strategy 
is that ABC was associating the thing they needed viewers to do (watch their 
shows) with activities their viewers already wanted to do (relax, drink wine, and 
eat popcorn). 

Over time, people began to connect watching ABC with feeling relaxed and 
entertained. If you drink red wine and eat popcorn at 8 p.m. every Thursday, 
then eventually “8 p.m. on Thursday” means relaxation and entertainment. The 
reward gets associated with the cue, and the habit of turning on the television 
becomes more attractive. 

You’re more likely to find a behavior attractive if you get to do one of your 
favorite things at the same time. Perhaps you want to hear about the latest 
celebrity gossip, but you need to get in shape. Using temptation bundling, you 
could only read the tabloids and watch reality shows at the gym. Maybe you 
want to get a pedicure, but you need to clean out your email inbox. Solution: 
only get a pedicure while processing overdue work emails. 

Temptation bundling is one way to apply a psychology theory known as 
Premack’s Principle. Named after the work of professor David Premack, the 
principle states that “more probable behaviors will reinforce less probable 
behaviors.” In other words, even if you don’t really want to process overdue 
work emails, you’ll become conditioned to do it if it means you get to do 
something you really want to do along the way. 

You can even combine temptation bundling with the habit stacking strategy 
we discussed in Chapter 5 to create a set of rules to guide your behavior. 


1. 








If you want to read the news, but you need to express more gratitude: 


1. After I get my morning coffee, I will say one thing I’m grateful for 
that happened yesterday (need). 
2. After I say one thing I’m grateful for, I will read the news (want). 


If you want to watch sports, but you need to make sales calls: 


1. After I get back from my lunch break, I will call three potential clients 
(need). 
2. After I call three potential clients, I will check ESPN (want). 


If you want to check Facebook, but you need to exercise more: 


1. After I pull out my phone, I will do ten burpees (need). 
2; After I do ten burpees, I will check Facebook (want). 


The hope is that eventually you’ll look forward to calling three clients or 
doing ten burpees because it means you get to read the latest sports news or 
check Facebook. Doing the thing you need to do means you get to do the thing 
you want to do. 

We began this chapter by discussing supernormal stimuli, which are 
heightened versions of reality that increase our desire to take action. Temptation 
bundling is one way to create a heightened version of any habit by connecting it 


with something you already want. Engimeerimgraitrulynirresistibleihabitistaard 
task, but this simple strategy can be employed to make nearly any habit more 
attractive than it would be otherwise. 


Chapter Summary 







9 
The Role of Family and Friends in Shaping Your 
Habits 


I. 1s, a Hungarian man named Laszlo Polgar wrote a series of strange letters to a 


woman named Klara. 





Laszlo believed in this idea so strongly that he wanted to test it with his own 
children—and he was writing to Klara because he “needed a wife willing to 
jump on board.” Klara was a teacher and, although she may not have been as 


adamant as Laszlo, she also believed that with proper instruction, anyone could) 


Laszlo decided chess would be a suitable field for the experiment, and he laid 
out a plan to raise his children to become chess prodigies. The kids would be 
home-schooled, a rarity in Hungary at the time. 









Laszlo successfully courted Klara, and within a few years, the Polgars were 
parents to three young girls: Susan, Sofia, and Judit. 

Susan, the oldest, began playing chess when she was four years old. Within 
six months, she was defeating adults. 

Sofia, the middle child, did even better. By fourteen, she was a world 
champion, and a few years later, she became a grandmaster. 

Judit, the youngest, was the best of all. By age five, she could beat her father. 
At twelve, she was the youngest player ever listed among the top one hundred 


chess players in the world. At fifteen years and four months old, she became the 
youngest grandmaster of all time—younger than Bobby Fischer, the previous 
record holder. For twenty-seven years, she was the number-one-ranked female 
chess player in the world. 

The childhood of the Polgar sisters was atypical, to say the least. And yet, if 
you ask them about it, they claim their lifestyle was attractive, even enjoyable. In 
interviews, the sisters talk about their childhood as entertaining rather than 
grueling. They loved playing chess. They couldn’t get enough of it. Once, Laszlo 
reportedly found Sofia playing chess in the bathroom in the middle of the night. 
Encouraging her to go back to sleep, he said, “Sofia, leave the pieces alone!” To 
which she replied, “Daddy, they won’t leave me alone!” 

The Polgar sisters grew up in a culture that prioritized chess above all else— 
praised them for it, rewarded them for it. In their world, an obsession with chess 
was normal. And as we are about to see, whatever habits are normal in your 
culture are among the most attractive behaviors yov’ll find. 


THE SEDUCTIVE PULL OF SOCIAL NORMS 


Humans are herd animals. We want to fit in, to bond with others, and to earn the 
respect and approval of our peers. Such inclinations are essential to our survival. 
For most of our evolutionary history, our ancestors lived in tribes. Becoming 
separated from the tribe—or worse, being cast out—was a death sentence. “The 
lone wolf dies, but the pack survives.”* 

Meanwhile, those who collaborated and bonded with others enjoyed increased 
safety, mating opportunities, and access to resources. As Charles Darwin noted, 
“In the long history of humankind, those who learned to collaborate and 
improvise most effectively have prevailed.” As a result, one of the deepest 
human desires is to belong. And this ancient preference exerts a powerful 
influence on our modern behavior. 

We don’t choose our earliest habits, we imitate them. We follow the script 
handed down by our friends and family, our church or school, our local 
community and society at large. Each of these cultures and groups comes with 
its own set of expectations and standards—when and whether to get married, 
how many children to have, which holidays to celebrate, how much money to 


spend on your child’s birthday party. (inlimany Ways) these! social norms "areithe 
invisible rules that guide your behavior each day. You're always keeping them 





(femembering. As the French philosopher Michel de Montaigne wrote, “The 
customs and practices of life in society sweep us along.” 

Most of the time, going along with the group does not feel like a burden. 
Everyone wants to belong. If you grow up in a family that rewards you for your 
chess skills, playing chess will seem like a very attractive thing to do. If you 
work in a job where everyone wears expensive suits, then you’ll be inclined to 
splurge on one as well. If all of your friends are sharing an inside joke or using a 
new phrase, you’ll want to do it, too, so they know that you “get it.” Behaviors 
are attractive when they help us fit in. 


Each group offers an opportunity to leverage the 2nd Law of Behavior Change 
and make our habits more attractive. 


1. Imitating the Close 


Proximity has a powerful effect on our behavior. This is true of the physical 
environment, as we discussed in Chapter 6, but it is also true of the social 
environment. 

We pick up habits from the people around us. We copy the way our parents 
handle arguments, the way our peers flirt with one another, the way our 
coworkers get results. When your friends smoke pot, you give it a try, too. When 
your wife has a habit of double-checking that the door is locked before going to 
bed, you pick it up as well. 

I find that I often imitate the behavior of those around me without realizing it. 
In conversation, Pll automatically assume the body posture of the other person. 
In college, I began to talk like my roommates. When traveling to other countries, 
I unconsciously imitate the local accent despite reminding myself to stop. 

As a general rule, the closer we are to someone, the more likely we are to 
imitate some of their habits. One groundbreaking study tracked twelve thousand 
people for thirty-two years and found that “a person’s chances of becoming 
obese increased by 57 percent if he or she had a friend who became obese.” It 
works the other way, too. Another study found that if one person in a 


relationship lost weight, the other partner would also slim down about one third 


of the time. Our friends and family provide a sort of invisible peer pressure that 








he took a small 
robotics class. Of the ten people in the class, four became astronauts. If your 
goal was to make it into space, then that room was about the best culture you 
could ask for. Similarly, one study found that the higher your best friend’s IQ at 
age eleven or twelve, the higher your IQ would be at age fifteen, even after 
controlling for natural levels of intelligence. We soak up the qualities and 
practices of those around us. 

One of the most effective things you can do to build better habits is to join a 
culture where your desired behavior is the normal behavior. New habits seem 
achievable when you see others doing them every day. 






Surround yourself with people who have the habits you want to have yourself. 
You’ ll rise together. 


Steve Kamb, an 
entrepreneur in New York City, runs a company called Nerd Fitness, which 
“helps nerds, misfits, and mutants lose weight, get strong, and get healthy.” His 
clients include video game lovers, movie fanatics, and average Joes who want to 
get in shape. Many people feel out of place the first time they go to the gym or 
try to change their diet, but if you are already similar to the other members of the 
group in some way—say, your mutual love of Star Wars—change becomes 
more appealing because it feels like something people like you already do. 
Nothing sustains motivation better than belonging to the tribe. It transforms a 
personal quest into a shared one. Previously, you were on your own. Your 
identity was singular. You are a reader. You are a musician. You are an athlete. 
When you join a book club or a band or a cycling group, your identity becomes 
linked to those around you. Growth and change is no longer an individual 
pursuit. We are readers. We are musicians. We are cyclists. The shared identity 
begins to reinforce your personal identity. This is why remaining part of a group 
after achieving a goal is crucial to maintaining your habits. It’s friendship and 
community that embed a new identity and help behaviors last over the long run. 





2. Imitating the Many 


In the 1950s, psychologist Solomon Asch conducted a series of experiments that 
are now taught to legions of undergrads each year. To begin each experiment, 
the subject entered the room with a group of strangers. Unbeknownst to them, 
the other participants were actors planted by the researcher and instructed to 
deliver scripted answers to certain questions. 

The group would be shown one card with a line on it and then a second card 
with a series of lines. Each person was asked to select the line on the second card 
that was similar in length to the line on the first card. It was a very simple task. 
Here is an example of two cards used in the experiment: 


CONFORMING TO SOCIAL NORMS 


FIGURE 10: This is a representation of two cards used by Solomon Asch in his famous social conformity experiments. The length of the line on the first card (left) is obviously the same as 
line C, but when a group of actors claimed it was a different length the research subjects would often change their minds and go with the crowd rather than believe their own eyes. 


The experiment always began the same. First, there would be some easy trials 


where everyone agreed on the correct line. After a few rounds, the participants 
were shown a test that was just as obvious as the previous ones, except the actors 
in the room would select an intentionally incorrect answer. For example, they 
would respond “A” to the comparison shown in Figure 10. Everyone would 
agree that the lines were the same even though they were clearly different. 

The subject, who was unaware of the ruse, would immediately become 
bewildered. Their eyes would open wide. They would laugh nervously to 
themselves. They would double-check the reactions of other participants. Their 
agitation would grow as one person after another delivered the same incorrect 
response. Soon, the subject began to doubt their own eyes. Eventually, they 
delivered the answer they knew in their heart to be incorrect. 

Asch ran this experiment many times and in many different ways. What he 
discovered was that as the number of actors increased, so did the conformity of 
the subject. If it was just the subject and one actor, then there was no effect on 
the person’s choice. They just assumed they were in the room with a dummy. 
When two actors were in the room with the subject, there was still little impact. 
But as the number of people increased to three actors and four and all the way to 
eight, the subject became more likely to second-guess themselves. By the end of 
the experiment, nearly 75 percent of the subjects had agreed with the group 
answer even though it was obviously incorrect. 

Whenever we are unsure how to act, we look to the group to guide our 
behavior. We are constantly scanning our environment and wondering, “What is 
everyone else doing?” We check reviews on Amazon or Yelp or TripAdvisor 
because we want to imitate the “best” buying, eating, and travel habits. It’s 
usually a smart strategy. There is evidence in numbers. 

But there can be a downside. 

The normal behavior of the tribe often overpowers the desired behavior of the 
individual. For example, one study found that when a chimpanzee learns an 
effective way to crack nuts open as a member of one group and then switches to 
a new group that uses a less effective strategy, it will avoid using the superior 
nut cracking method just to blend in with the rest of the chimps. 


‘Humans are similar. There is tremendous internal pressure to comply with the 
norms of the group. The reward of being accepted is often greater than the 
reward of winning an argument, looking smart, or finding truth. Most days, we'd 








3. Imitating the Powerful 


We are drawn to behaviors that earn us respect, approval, admiration, and 
status. We want to be the one in the gym who can do muscle-ups or the musician 
who can play the hardest chord progressions or the parent with the most 
accomplished children because these things separate us from the crowd. Once 
we fit in, we start looking for ways to stand out. 








‘industry. You make a recipe from your favorite baker. You borrow the 
storytelling strategies of your favorite writer. You mimic the communication 





style of your boss. We imitate people we envy. 
High-status people enjoy the approval, respect, and praise of others. And that 


means if a behavior can get us approval, respect, and praise, wë find it attractive. 
We are also motivated to avoid behaviors that would lower our status. We 


trim our hedges and mow our lawn because we don’t want to be the slob of the 
neighborhood. When our mother comes to visit, we clean up the house because 
we don’t want to be judged. We are continually wondering (What will others 
and altering our behavior based on the answer. 

The Polgar sisters—the chess prodigies mentioned at the beginning of this 
chapter: 


gg o ie pues itl Eucla eet Goce uence Cy 
‘have on our behavior. The sisters practiced chess for many hours each day and 
continued this remarkable effort for decades. 















‘culture. From the praise of their parents to the achievement of different status 
markers like becoming a grandmaster, they had many reasons to continue their 


effort. 


Chapter Summary 


10 
How to Find and Fix the Causes of Your Bad 
Habits 


I, tare202, | was sitting in an old apartment just a few blocks from Istanbul’s most 


famous street, Istiklal Caddesi. I was in the middle of a four-day trip to Turkey 
and my guide, Mike, was relaxing in a worn-out armchair a few feet away. 

Mike wasn’t really a guide. He was just a guy from Maine who had been 
living in Turkey for five years, but he offered to show me around while I was 
visiting the country and I took him up on it. On this particular night, I had been 
invited to dinner with him and a handful of his Turkish friends. 

There were seven of us, and I was the only one who hadn’t, at some point, 


smoked at least one pack of cigarettes per day. I asked one of the Turks how he 
got started. “Friends,” he said. “It always starts with your friends. One friend 





What was truly fascinating was that half of the people in the room had 
managed to quit smoking. Mike had been smoke-free for a few years at that 
point, and he swore up and down that he broke the habit because of a book 






called Allen Carr’s Easy Way to Stop Smoking. 
Start to realize that you don’t need to smoke.” 

I had never tried a cigarette, but I took a look at the book afterward out of 
curiosity. The author employs an interesting strategy to help smokers eliminate 
their cravings. He systematically reframes each cue associated with smoking and 


gives it anew meaning. 
He says things like: 









Over and over, he repeats these phrases and others like them. “Get it clearly 
into your mind,” he says. “You are losing nothing and you are making 
marvelous positive gains not only in health, energy and money but also in 
confidence, self-respect, freedom and, most important of all, in the length and 
quality of your future life.” 

By the time you get to the end of the book, smoking seems like the most 
ridiculous thing in the world to do. And if you no longer expect smoking to bring 
you any benefits, you have no reason to smoke. It is an inversion of the 2nd Law 
of Behavior Change: make it unattractive. 

Now, I know this idea might sound overly simplistic. Just change your mind and 
you can quit smoking. But stick with me for a minute. 


WHERE CRAVINGS COME FROM 


I 
often have a craving that goes something like this: “I want to eat tacos.” If you 
were to ask me why I want to eat tacos, I wouldn’t say, “Because I need food to 
survive.” But the truth is, somewhere deep down, I am motivated to eat tacos 


because I have to eat to survive. The underlying motive is to obtain food and 





A craving is just a specific manifestation of a deeper underlying motive. Your 
brain did not evolve with a desire to smoke cigarettes or to check Instagram or to 
play video games. At a deep level, you simply want to reduce uncertainty and 
relieve anxiety, to win social acceptance and approval, or to achieve status. 

Look at nearly any product that is habit-forming and yov’ll see that it does not 
create a new motivation, but rather latches onto the underlying motives of 
human nature. 





Your habits are modern-day solutions to ancient desires. New versions of old 
vices. The underlying motives behind human behavior remain the same. The 
specific habits we perform differ based on the period of history. 

Here’s the powerful part: there are many different ways to address the same 
underlying motive. One person might learn to reduce stress by smoking a 
cigarette. Another person learns to ease their anxiety by going for a run. Your 
current habits are not necessarily the best way to solve the problems you face; 
they are just the methods you learned to use. Once you associate a solution with 
the problem you need to solve, you keep coming back to it. 

Habits are all about associations. These associations determine whether we 
predict a habit to be worth repeating or not. As we covered in our discussion of 
the 1st Law, your brain is continually absorbing information and noticing cues in 
the environment. Every time you perceive a cue, your brain runs a simulation 
and makes a prediction about what to do in the next moment. 





You see a cue, categorize it based on past experience, and determine the 
appropriate response. 


This all happens in an instant, but it plays a crucial role in your habits because 
every action is preceded by a prediction. Life feels reactive, but it is actually 
predictive. All day long, you are making your best guess of how to act given 
what you’ve just seen and what has worked for you in the past. You are 
endlessly predicting what will happen in the next moment. 

Our behavior is heavily dependent on these predictions. Put another way, our 
behavior is heavily dependent on how we interpret the events that happen to us, 
not necessarily the objective reality of the events themselves. Two people can 
look at the same cigarette, and one feels the urge to smoke while the other is 
repulsed by the smell. The same cue can spark a good habit or a bad habit 


depending on your prediction. The cause of your habits is actually the prediction 


These predictions lead to feelings, which is how we typically describe a 
craving—a feeling, a desire, an urge. Feelings and emotions transform the cues 
we perceive and the predictions we make into a signal that we can apply. They 
help explain what we are currently sensing. For instance, whether or not you 
realize it, you are noticing how warm or cold you feel right now. If the 
temperature drops by one degree, you probably won’t do anything. If the 
temperature drops ten degrees, however, you’ll feel cold and put on another 
layer of clothing. Feeling cold was the signal that prompted you to act. You have 
been sensing the cues the entire time, but it is only when you predict that you 
would be better off in a different state that you take action. 

A craving is the sense that something is missing. It is the desire to change 
your internal state. When the temperature falls, there is a gap between what your 
body is currently sensing and what it wants to be sensing. This gap between your 
current state and your desired state provides a reason to act. 

Desire is the difference between where you are now and where you want to be 
in the future. Even the tiniest action is tinged with the motivation to feel 
differently than you do in the moment. When you binge-eat or light up or browse 
social media, what you really want is not a potato chip or a cigarette or a bunch 
of likes. What you really want is to feel different. 

Our feelings and emotions tell us whether to hold steady in our current state or 
to make a change. They help us decide the best course of action. Neurologists 
have discovered that when emotions and feelings are impaired, we actually lose 
the ability to make decisions. We have no signal of what to pursue and what to 
avoid. As the neuroscientist Antonio Damasio explains, “It is emotion that 
allows you to mark things as good, bad, or indifferent.” 


really an attempt to address your fundamental underlying motives. Whenever a 


habit successfully addresses a motive, you develop a craving to do it again. In 
time, you learn to predict that checking social media will help you feel loved or 
that watching YouTube will allow you to forget your fears. Habits are attractive 
when we associate them with positive feelings, and we can use this insight to our 
advantage rather than to our detriment. 


HOW TO REPROGRAM YOUR BRAIN TO ENJOY HARD HABITS 






Sometimes, 

You have 
to wake up early for work. You have to make another sales call for your 
business. You have to cook dinner for your family. 

Now, imagine changing just one word: You don’t “have” to. You “get” to. 

You get to wake up early for work. You get to make another sales call for 
your business. You get to cook dinner for your family. By simply changing one 
word, you shift the way you view each event. You transition from seeing these 
behaviors as burdens and turn them into opportunities. 

The key point is that both versions of reality are true. You have to do those 
things, and you also get to do them. We can find evidence for whatever mind-set 
we choose. 

I once heard a story about a man who uses a wheelchair. When asked if it was 
difficult being confined, he responded, “I’m not confined to my wheelchair—I 
am liberated by it. If it wasn’t for my wheelchair, I would be bed-bound and 
never able to leave my house.” This shift in perspective completely transformed 
how he lived each day. 

Reframing your habits to highlight their benefits rather than their drawbacks is 
a fast and lightweight way to reprogram your mind and make a habit seem more 
attractive. 

Exercise. 


Finance. 





Meditatio 





g a big 
presentation or competing in an important event. They experience quicker 
breathing, a faster heart rate, heightened arousal. If we interpret these feelings 
negatively, then we feel threatened and tense up. If we interpret these feelings 
positively, then we can respond with fluidity and grace. You can reframe “I am 
nervous” to “I am excited and I’m getting an adrenaline rush to help me 
concentrate.” 

These little mind-set shifts aren’t magic, but they can help change the feelings 
you associate with a particular habit or situation. 

If you want to take it a step further, you can create a motivation ritual. You 
simply practice associating your habits with something you enjoy, then you can 
use that cue whenever you need a bit of motivation. For instance, if you always 
play the same song before having sex, then you’ll begin to link the music with 
the act. Whenever you want to get in the mood, just press play. 

Ed Latimore, a boxer and writer from Pittsburgh, benefited from a similar 
strategy without knowing it. “Odd realization,” he wrote. “My focus and 
concentration goes up just by putting my headphones [on] while writing. I don’t 
even have to play any music.” Without realizing it, he was conditioning himself. 
In the beginning, he put his headphones on, played some music he enjoyed, and 
did focused work. After doing it five, ten, twenty times, putting his headphones 
on became a cue that he automatically associated with increased focus. The 
craving followed naturally. 

Athletes use similar strategies to get themselves in the mind-set to perform. 
During my baseball career, I developed a specific ritual of stretching and 
throwing before each game. The whole sequence took about ten minutes, and I 
did it the same way every single time. While it physically warmed me up to play, 
more importantly, it put me in the right mental state. I began to associate my 
pregame ritual with feeling competitive and focused. Even if I wasn’t motivated 
beforehand, by the time I was done with my ritual, I was in “game mode.” 





Three deep breaths. Smile. Pet the dog. Repeat. 


Eventually, you’|l begin to associate this breathe-and-smile routine with being 
in a good mood. It becomes a cue that means feeling happy. Once established, 
you can break it out anytime you need to change your emotional state. Stressed 
at work? Take three deep breaths and smile. Sad about life? Three deep breaths 
and smile. Once a habit has been built, the cue can prompt a craving, even if it 
has little to do with the original situation. 





Chapter Summary 





HOW TO CREATE A GOOD HABIT 


he 1st Law: Make It Obvious 


1.1: Fill out the Habits Scorecard. Write down your current habits to become aware of them. 
1.2: Use implementation intentions: “I will [BEHAVIOR] at [TIME] in [LOCATION].” 
1.3: Use habit stacking: “After [CURRENT HABIT], I will [NEW HABIT].” 


1.4: Design your environment. Make the cues of good habits obvious and visible. 


The 2nd Law: Make It Attractive 


2.1: Use temptation bundling. Pair an action you want to do with an action you need to do. 
2.2: Join a culture where your desired behavior is the normal behavior. 


2.3: Create a motivation ritual. Do something you enjoy immediately before a difficult habit. 


The 3rd Law: Make It Easy 


he 4th Law: Make It Satisfying 


HOW TO BREAK A BAD HABIT 


Inversion of the 1st Law: Make It Invisible 


1.5: Reduce exposure. Remove the cues of your bad habits from your environment. 


Inversion of the 2nd Law: Make It Unattractive 


2.4: Reframe your mind-set. Highlight the benefits of avoiding your bad habits. 


Inversion of the 3rd Law: Make It Difficult 
Inversion of the 4th Law: Make It Unsatisfying 


You can download a printable version of this habits cheat sheet at: atomichabits.com/cheatsheet 


THE 3RD LAW 


Make It Easy 


11 
Walk Slowly, but Never Backward 


O... msr day of class, Jerry Uelsmann, a professor at the University of Florida, 


divided his film photography students into two groups. 

Everyone on the left side of the classroom, he explained, would be in the 
“quantity” group. They would be graded solely on the amount of work they 
produced. On the final day of class, he would tally the number of photos 
submitted by each student. One hundred photos would rate an A, ninety photos a 
B, eighty photos a C, and so on. 

Meanwhile, everyone on the right side of the room would be in the “quality” 
group. They would be graded only on the excellence of their work. They would 
only need to produce one photo during the semester, but to get an A, it had to be 
a nearly perfect image. 

At the end of the term, he was surprised to find that all the best photos were 
produced by the quantity group. During the semester, these students were busy 
taking photos, experimenting with composition and lighting, testing out various 
methods in the darkroom, and learning from their mistakes. In the process of 
creating hundreds of photos, they honed their skills. Meanwhile, the quality 
group sat around speculating about perfection. In the end, they had little to show 
for their efforts other than unverified theories and one mediocre photo.* 

It is easy to get bogged down trying to find the optimal plan for change: the 
fastest way to lose weight, the best program to build muscle, the perfect idea for 
a side hustle. We are so focused on figuring out the best approach that we never 


get around to taking action. ‘As Voltaire once wrote, “The best is the enemy of 
the good.” 

I refer to this as the difference between being in motion and taking action. The 
two ideas sound similar, but they’re not the same. When you’re in motion, 
you’re planning and strategizing and learning. Those are all good things, but 
they don’t produce a result. 


Action, on the other hand, is the type of behavior that will deliver an outcome. 
If I outline twenty ideas for articles I want to write, that’s motion. If I actually sit 
down and write an article, that’s action. If I search for a better diet plan and read 
a few books on the topic, that’s motion. If I actually eat a healthy meal, that’s 
action. 

Sometimes motion is useful, but it will never produce an outcome by itself. It 
doesn’t matter how many times you go talk to the personal trainer, that motion 
will never get you in shape. Only the action of working out will get the result 
you’re looking to achieve. 

If motion doesn’t lead to results, why do we do it? Sometimes we do it 
because we actually need to plan or learn more. But more often than not, we do 
it because motion allows us to feel like we’re making progress without running 
the risk of failure. Most of us are experts at avoiding criticism. It doesn’t feel 
good to fail or to be judged publicly, so we tend to avoid situations where that 
might happen. And that’s the biggest reason why you slip into motion rather than 
taking action: you want to delay failure. 

It’s easy to be in motion and convince yourself that you’re still making 
progress. You think, “I’ve got conversations going with four potential clients 
right now. This is good. We’re moving in the right direction.” Or, “I 
brainstormed some ideas for that book I want to write. This is coming together.” 

Motion makes you feel like you’re getting things done. But really, you’re just 
preparing to get something done. When preparation becomes a form of 
procrastination, you need to change something. You don’t want to merely be 
planning. You want to be practicing. 





HOW LONG DOES IT ACTUALLY TAKE TO FORM A NEW HABIT? 


Habit formation is the process by which a behavior becomes progressively more 
automatic through repetition. The more you repeat an activity, the more the 
structure of your brain changes to become efficient at that activity. 
Neuroscientists call this long-term potentiation, which refers to the strengthening 
of connections between neurons in the brain based on recent patterns of activity. 
With each repetition, cell-to-cell signaling improves and the neural connections 
tighten. First described by neuropsychologist Donald Hebb in 1949, this 


phenomenon is commonly known as Hebb’s Law: “Neurons that fire together 
wire together.” 






Mathematicians, 
meanwhile, have increased gray matter in the inferior parietal lobule, which 
plays a key role in computation and calculation. Its size is directly correlated 
with the amount of time spent in the field; the older and more experienced the 
mathematician, the greater the increase in gray matter. 

When scientists analyzed the brains of taxi drivers in London, they found that 
the hippocampus—a region of the brain involved in spatial memory—was 
significantly larger in their subjects than in non-taxi drivers. Even more 
fascinating, the hippocampus decreased in size when a driver retired. Like the 
muscles of the body responding to regular weight training, particular regions of 
the brain adapt as they are used and atrophy as they are abandoned. 

Of course, the importance of repetition in establishing habits was recognized 
long before neuroscientists began poking around. In 1860, the English 
philosopher George H. Lewes noted, “In learning to speak a new language, to 
play on a musical instrument, or to perform unaccustomed movements, great 
difficulty is felt, because the channels through which each sensation has to pass 
have not become established; but no sooner has frequent repetition cut a 
pathway, than this difficulty vanishes; the actions become so automatic that they 
can be performed while the mind is otherwise engaged.” Both common sense 
and scientific evidence agree: repetition is a form of change. 

Each time you repeat an action, you are activating a particular neural circuit 
associated with that habitilidhis{imeanis)that\simply putting in| your jrepsiisjonelof 
It is why the 
students who took tons of photos improved their skills while those who merely 
theorized about perfect photos did not. One group engaged in active practice, the 
other in passive learning. One in action, the other in motion. 








It looks something like this: 


THE HABIT LINE 


AUTOMATICITY 





REPETITIONS 


FIGURE 11: In the beginning (point A), a habit requires a good deal of effort and concentration to perform. After a few repetitions (point B), it gets easier, but still requires some conscious 
attention. With enough practice (point C), the habit becomes more automatic than conscious. Beyond this threshold—the habit line—the behavior can be done more or less without thinking. 
A new habit has been formed. 


On the following page, you’ll see what it looks like when researchers track the 
level of automaticity for an actual habit like walking for ten minutes each day. 
The shape of these charts, which scientists call learning curves, reveals an 
important truth about behavior change: habits form based on frequency, not 
time. 


WALKING 10 MINUTES PER DAY 


AUTOMATICITY 





10 20 30 40 10 60 


DAY 


70 80 90 100 


FIGURE 12: This graph shows someone who built the habit of walking for ten minutes after breakfast each day. Notice that as the repetitions increase, so does automaticity, until the 
behavior is as easy and automatic as it can be. 


One of the most common questions I hear is, “How long does it take to build a 
new habit?” But what people really should be asking is, “How many does it take 
to form a new habit?” That is, how many repetitions are required to make a habit 
automatic? 






Your current habits have been internalized over the course 


of hundreds, if not thousands, of repetitions. New habits require the same level 
of frequency. You need to string together enough successful attempts until the 
behavior is firmly embedded in your mind and you cross the Habit Line. 

In practice, it doesn’t really matter how long it takes for a habit to become 
automatic. What matters is that you take the actions you need to take to make 





Chapter Summary 





12 
The Law of Least Effort 


I. HIS AWARD“WINNING BOOK, Guns, Germs, and Steel, anthropologist and biologist Jared 


Diamond points out a simple fact: different continents have different shapes. At 
first glance, this statement seems rather obvious and unimportant, but it turns out 
to have a profound impact on human behavior. 

The primary axis of the Americas runs from north to south. That is, the 
landmass of North and South America tends to be tall and thin rather than wide 
and fat. The same is generally true for Africa. Meanwhile, the landmass that 
makes up Europe, Asia, and the Middle East is the opposite. This massive stretch 
of land tends to be more east-west in shape. According to Diamond, this 
difference in shape played a significant role in the spread of agriculture over the 
centuries. 

When agriculture began to spread around the globe, farmers had an easier 
time expanding along east-west routes than along north-south ones. This is 
because locations along the same latitude generally share similar climates, 
amounts of sunlight and rainfall, and changes in season. These factors allowed 
farmers in Europe and Asia to domesticate a few crops and grow them along the 
entire stretch of land from France to China. 


THE SHAPE OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR 


EAST - WEST ORIENTATION 


/ 


NORTH - SOUTH ORIENTATION 


FIGURE 13: The primary axis of Europe and Asia is east-west. The primary axis of the Americas and Africa is north-south. This leads to a wider range of climates up-and-down the 
Americas than across Europe and Asia. As a result, agriculture spread nearly twice as fast across Europe and Asia than it did elsewhere. The behavior of farmers—even across hundreds or 
thousands of years—was constrained by the amount of friction in the environment. 


By comparison, the climate varies greatly when traveling from north to south. 
Just imagine how different the weather is in Florida compared to Canada. You 
can be the most talented farmer in the world, but it won’t help you grow Florida 
oranges in the Canadian winter. Snow is a poor substitute for soil. In order to 
spread crops along north-south routes, farmers would need to find and 
domesticate new plants whenever the climate changed. 

As a result, agriculture spread two to three times faster across Asia and 
Europe than it did up and down the Americas. Over the span of centuries, this 
small difference had a very big impact. Increased food production allowed for 
more rapid population growth. With more people, these cultures were able to 
build stronger armies and were better equipped to develop new technologies. 
The changes started out small—a crop that spread slightly farther, a population 
that grew slightly faster—but compounded into substantial differences over time. 

The spread of agriculture provides an example of the 3rd Law of Behavior 
Change on a global scale. Conventional wisdom holds that motivation is the key 
to habit change. Maybe if you really wanted it, you’d actually do it. But the truth 
is, our real motivation is to be lazy and to do what is convenient. And despite 
what the latest productivity best seller will tell you, this is a smart strategy, not a 


dumb one. 

Energy is precious, and the brain is wired to conserve it whenever possible. It 
is human nature to follow the Law of Least Effort, which states that when 
deciding between two similar options, people will naturally gravitate toward the 
option that requires the least amount of work.* For example, expanding your 
farm to the east where you can grow the same crops rather than heading north 
where the climate is different. Out of all the possible actions we could take, the 
one that is realized is the one that delivers the most value for the least effort. We 
are motivated to do what is easy. 

Every action requires a certain amount of energy. The more energy required, 
the less likely it is to occur. If your goal is to do a hundred push-ups per day, 
that’s a lot of energy! In the beginning, when you’re motivated and excited, you 
can muster the strength to get started. But after a few days, such a massive effort 
feels exhausting. Meanwhile, sticking to the habit of doing one push-up per day 
requires almost no energy to get started. And the less energy a habit requires, the 
more likely it is to occur. 

Look at any behavior that fills up much of your life and you’ll see that it can 
be performed with very low levels of motivation. Habits like scrolling on our 
phones, checking email, and watching television steal so much of our time 
because they can be performed almost without effort. They are remarkably 
convenient. 















is the outcome the habit delivers. The greater the 
he more friction there is between 
you and your desired end state. This is why it is crucial to make your habits so 
easy that you’ll do them even when you don’t feel like it. If you can make your 
good habits more convenient, you’|l be more likely to follow through on them. 

But what about all the moments when we seem to do the opposite? If we’re all 
so lazy, then how do you explain people accomplishing hard things like raising a 
child or starting a business or climbing Mount Everest? 

Certainly, you are capable of doing very hard things. The problem is that 
some days you feel like doing the hard work and some days you feel like giving 
in. On the tough days, it’s crucial to have as many things working in your favor 
as possible so that you can overcome the challenges life naturally throws your 
way. The less friction you face, the easier it is for your stronger self to emerge. 
The idea behind make it easy is not to only do easy things. The idea is to make it 
as easy as possible in the moment to do things that payoff in the long run. 


itself. What you really want 


HOW TO ACHIEVE MORE WITH LESS EFFORT 


Imagine you are holding a garden hose that is bent in the middle. Some water 
can flow through, but not very much. If you want to increase the rate at which 
water passes through the hose, you have two options. The first option is to crank 
up the valve and force more water out. The second option is to simply remove 
the bend in the hose and let water flow through naturally. 

Trying to pump up your motivation to stick with a hard habit is like trying to 
force water through a bent hose. You can do it, but it requires a lot of effort and 
increases the tension in your life. Meanwhile, making your habits simple and 
easy is like removing the bend in the hose. Rather than trying to overcome the 
friction in your life, you reduce it. 

One of the most effective ways to reduce the friction associated with your 
Chapter 6, we discussed environment 
design as a method for making cues more obvious, but you can also optimize 
your environment to make actions easier. For example, when deciding where to 
practice a new habit, it is best to choose a place that is already along the path of 
your daily routine. Habits are easier to build when they fit into the flow of your 
life. You are more likely to go to the gym if it is on your way to work because 
stopping doesn’t add much friction to your lifestyle. By comparison, if the gym 
is off the path of your normal commute—even by just a few blocks—now you’re 
going “out of your way” to get there. 

Perhaps even more effective is reducing the friction within your home or 


office. Too often, we try to start habits in high-friction environments. We try to 
follow a strict diet while we are out to dinner with friends. We try to write a 
book in a chaotic household. We try to concentrate while using a smartphone 
filled with distractions. It doesn’t have to be this way. We can remove the points 
of friction that hold us back. This is precisely what electronics manufacturers in 
Japan began to do in the 1970s. 

In an article published in the New Yorker titled “Better All the Time,” James 
Suroweicki writes: 

“Japanese firms emphasized what came to be known as ‘lean production,’ 
relentlessly looking to remove waste of all kinds from the production process, 
down to redesigning workspaces, so workers didn’t have to waste time twisting 
and turning to reach their tools. The result was that Japanese factories were more 
efficient and Japanese products were more reliable than American ones. In 1974, 
service calls for American-made color televisions were five times as common as 


for Japanese televisions. By 1979, it took American workers three times as long 
to assemble their sets.” 



















eliminated it. As they subtracted wasted effort, they added customers and 
revenue. Similarly, when we remove the points of friction that sap our time and 
energy, we can achieve more with less effort. (This is one reason tidying up can 
feel so good: we are simultaneously moving forward and lightening the 
cognitive load our environment places on us.) 

If you look at the most habit-forming products, you’ll notice that one of the 
things these goods and services do best is remove little bits of friction from your 
life. Meal delivery services reduce the friction of shopping for groceries. Dating 






Like a Japanese television manufacturer redesigning 


They reduce the number of 
fields on each form. They pare down the number of clicks required to create an 
account. They deliver their products with easy-to-understand directions or ask 
their customers to make fewer choices. 

When the first voice-activated speakers were released—products like Google 
Home, Amazon Echo, and Apple HomePod—I asked a friend what he liked 
about the product he had purchased. He said it was just easier to say “Play some 
country music” than to pull out his phone, open the music app, and pick a 
playlist. Of course, just a few years earlier, having unlimited access to music in 
your pocket was a remarkably frictionless behavior compared to driving to the 
store and buying a CD. Business is a never-ending quest to deliver the same 
result in an easier fashion. 

Similar strategies have been used effectively by governments. When the 
British government wanted to increase tax collection rates, they switched from 
sending citizens to a web page where the tax form could be downloaded to 
linking directly to the form. Reducing that one step in the process increased the 
response rate from 19.2 percent to 23.4 percent. For a country like the United 
Kingdom, those percentage points represent millions in tax revenue. 

The central idea is to create an environment where doing the right thing is as 
easy as possible. Much of the battle of building better habits comes down to 
finding ways to reduce the friction associated with our good habits and increase 
the friction associated with our bad ones. 





PRIME THE ENVIRONMENT FOR FUTURE USE 


Oswald Nuckols is an IT developer from Natchez, Mississippi. He is also 
someone who understands the power of priming his environment. 

Nuckols dialed in his cleaning habits by following a strategy he refers to as 
“resetting the room.” For instance, when he finishes watching television, he 
places the remote back on the TV stand, arranges the pillows on the couch, and 
folds the blanket. When he leaves his car, he throws any trash away. Whenever 
he takes a shower, he wipes down the toilet while the shower is warming up. (As 
he notes, the “perfect time to clean the toilet is right before you wash yourself in 
the shower anyway.”) The purpose of resetting each room is not simply to clean 
up after the last action, but to prepare for the next action. 

“When I walk into a room everything is in its right place,” Nuckols wrote. 
“Because I do this every day in every room, stuff always stays in good shape. .. . 
People think I work hard but I’m actually really lazy. I’m just proactively lazy. It 
gives you so much time back.” 

Whenever you organize a space for its intended purpose, you are priming it to 
make the next action easy. For instance, my wife keeps a box of greeting cards 
that are presorted by occasion—birthday, sympathy, wedding, graduation, and 
more. Whenever necessary, she grabs an appropriate card and sends it off. She is 
incredibly good at remembering to send cards because she has reduced the 
friction of doing so. For years, I was the opposite. Someone would have a baby 
and I would think, “I should send a card.” But then weeks would pass and by the 
time I remembered to pick one up at the store, it was too late. The habit wasn’t 
easy. 

There are many ways to prime your environment so it’s ready for immediate 
use. If you want to cook a healthy breakfast, place the skillet on the stove, set the 
cooking spray on the counter, and lay out any plates and utensils you’ll need the 
night before. When you wake up, making breakfast will be easy. 





These are simple ways to make the good habit the path of least resistance. 

You can also invert this principle and prime the environment to make bad 
behaviors difficult. If you find yourself watching too much television, for 
example, then unplug it after each use. Only plug it back in if you can say out 
loud the name of the show you want to watch. This setup creates just enough 
friction to prevent mindless viewing. 


Tf that doesn’t do it, you can take it a step further. Unplug the television and 
take the batteries out of the remote after each use, so it takes an extra ten seconds 
And if you’re really hard-core, move the television out of the 
living room and into a closet after each use. You can be sure you’ll only take it 


out when you really want to watch something. The greater the friction, the less 
likely the habit. 

Whenever possible, I leave my phone in a different room until lunch. When 
it’s right next to me, Pll check it all morning for no reason at all. But when it is 
in another room, I rarely think about it. And the friction is high enough that I 
won’t go get it without a reason. As a result, I get three to four hours each 
morning when I can work without interruption. 

If sticking your phone in another room doesn’t seem like enough, tell a friend 
or family member to hide it from you for a few hours. Ask a coworker to keep it 
at their desk in the morning and give it back to you at lunch. 

It is remarkable how little friction is required to prevent unwanted behavior. 
When I hide beer in the back of the fridge where I can’t see it, I drink less. When 
I delete social media apps from my phone, it can be weeks before I download 
them again and log in. These tricks are unlikely to curb a true addiction, but for 
many of us, a little bit of friction can be the difference between sticking with a 
good habit or sliding into a bad one. Imagine the cumulative impact of making 
dozens of these changes and living in an environment designed to make the good 
behaviors easier and the bad behaviors harder. 

Whether we are approaching behavior change as an individual, a parent, a 
coach, or a leader, we should ask ourselves the same question: “How can we 
design a world where it’s easy to
 do what’s right?” Redesign your life so the 
actions that matter most are also the actions that are easiest to do. 










Chapter Summary 


13 


How to Stop Procrastinating by Using the Two- 
Minute Rule 


T T» s Widely regarded as one of the greatest dancers and choreographers 


of the modern era. In 1992, she was awarded a MacArthur Fellowship, often 
referred to as the Genius Grant, and she has spent the bulk of her career touring 
the globe to perform her original works. She also credits much of her success to 
simple daily habits. 

“I begin each day of my life with a ritual,” she writes. “I wake up at 5:30 
A.M., put on my workout clothes, my leg warmers, my sweat shirt, and my hat. I 
walk outside my Manhattan home, hail a taxi, and tell the driver to take me to 
the Pumping Iron gym at 91st Street and First Avenue, where I work out for two 
hours. 

“The ritual is not the stretching and weight training I put my body through 
each morning at the gym; the ritual is the cab. The moment I tell the driver 
where to go I have completed the ritual. 

“Its a simple act, but doing it the same way each morning habitualizes it— 
makes it repeatable, easy to do. It reduces the chance that I would skip it or do it 
differently. It is one more item in my arsenal of routines, and one less thing to 
think about.” 

Hailing a cab each morning may be a tiny action, but it is a splendid example 
of the 3rd Law of Behavior Change. 

Researchers estimate that 40 to 50 percent of our actions on any given day are 
done out of habit. This is already a substantial percentage, but the true influence 
of your habits is even greater than these numbers suggest. Habits are automatic 
choices that influence the conscious decisions that follow. Yes, a habit can be 
completed in just a few seconds, but it can also shape the actions that you take 
for minutes or hours afterward. 

Habits are like the entrance ramp to a highway. They lead you down a path 


and, before you know it, you’re speeding toward the next behavior. It seems to 
be easier to continue what you are already doing than to start doing something 
different. You sit through a bad movie for two hours. You keep snacking even 
when you’re already full. You check your phone for “just a second” and soon 
you have spent twenty minutes staring at the screen. In this way, the habits you 
follow without thinking often determine the choices you make when you are 
thinking. 

Each evening, there is a tiny moment—usually around 5:15 p.m.—that shapes 
the rest of my night. My wife walks in the door from work and either we change 
into our workout clothes and head to the gym or we crash onto the couch, order 
Indian food, and watch The Office.* Similar to Twyla Tharp hailing the cab, the 
ritual is changing into my workout clothes. If I change clothes, I know the 
workout will happen. Everything that follows—driving to the gym, deciding 
which exercises to do, stepping under the bar—is easy once I’ve taken the first 
step. 

Every day, there are a handful of moments that deliver an outsized impact. I 
refer to these little choices as decisive moments. 








DECISIVE MOMENTS 


GOOD 


DAY 
BAD 
CHOICE eee 
ETC 
N CHOICE. 
GOOD 
CHOICE 
GOOD 
CHOICE 
BAD 
DAY 


FIGURE 14: The difference between a good day and a bad day is often a few productive and healthy choices made at decisive moments. Each one is like a fork in the road, and these choices 
stack up throughout the day and can ultimately lead to very different outcomes. 


Decisive moments set the options available to your future self. For instance, 
walking into a restaurant is a decisive moment because it determines what you’ ll 
be eating for lunch. Technically, you are in control of what you order, but in a 
larger sense, you can only order an item if it is on the menu. If you walk into a 
steakhouse, you can get a sirloin or a rib eye, but not sushi. Your options are 
constrained by what’s available. They are shaped by the first choice. 

We are limited by where our habits lead us. This is why mastering the 
decisive moments throughout your day is so important. Each day is made up of 
many moments, but it is really a few habitual choices that determine the path 
you take. These little choices stack up, each one setting the trajectory for how 
you spend the next chunk of time. 


THE TWO-MINUTE RULE 





When you 
dream about making a change, excitement inevitably takes over and you end up 
trying to do too much too soon. 






You’ll find that nearly any habit can be scaled down into a two-minute 


version: 








two minutes should be easy. What you want is a “gateway habit” that naturally 


leads you down a more productive path. 

You can usually figure out the gateway habits that will lead to your desired 
outcome by mapping out your goals on a scale from “very easy” to “very hard.” 
For instance, running a marathon is very hard. Running a 5K is hard. Walking 
ten thousand steps is moderately difficult. Walking ten minutes is easy. And 
putting on your running shoes is very easy. Your goal might be to run a 
marathon, but your gateway habit is to put on your running shoes. That’s how 
you follow the Two-Minute Rule. 


Very hard 


Put on your running shoes Walk ten minutes Walk ten thousand steps Run a 5K Run a marathon 
Write one sentence Write one paragraph Write one thousand words Write a five-thousand-word article Write a book 


Open your notes Study for ten minutes Study for three hours Get straight A’s Earn a PhD 


If you can’t learn the basic skill of 
showing up, then you have little hope of mastering the finer details. 





As you master the art of showing up, the first two minutes simply become a 
ritual at the beginning of a larger routine. This is not merely a hack to make 
habits easier but actually the ideal way to master a difficult skill. The more you 
ritualize the beginning of a process, the more likely it becomes that you can slip 
into the state of deep focus that is required to do great things. By doing the same 
warm-up before every workout, you make it easier to get into a state of peak 
performance. By following the same creative ritual, you make it easier to get 
into the hard work of creating. By developing a consistent power-down habit, 
you make it easier to get to bed at a reasonable time each night. You may not be 
able to automate the whole process, but you can make the first action mindless. 
Make it easy to start and the rest will follow. 





And if you know it’s a mental trick, why would you 
fall for it? 








Your habit can only last one 
hundred and twenty seconds. 

One of my readers used this strategy to lose over one hundred pounds. In the 
beginning, he went to the gym each day, but he told himself he wasn’t allowed 
to stay for more than five minutes. He would go to the gym, exercise for five 
minutes, and leave as soon as his time was up. After a few weeks, he looked 
around and thought, “Well, I’m always coming here anyway. I might as well 
start staying a little longer.” A few years later, the weight was gone. 

Journaling provides another example. Nearly everyone can benefit from 
getting their thoughts out of their head and onto paper, but most people give up 
after a few days or avoid it entirely because journaling feels like a chore.* The 
secret is to always stay below the point where it feels like work. Greg 
McKeown, a leadership consultant from the United Kingdom, built a daily 


journaling habit by specifically writing less than he felt like. He always stopped 
journaling before it seemed like a hassle. Ernest Hemingway believed in similar 
advice for any kind of writing. “The best way is to always stop when you are 
going good,” he said. 

Strategies like this work for another reason, too: they reinforce the identity 
you want to build. If you show up at the gym five days in a row—even if it’s just 
for two minutes—you are casting votes for your new identity. You’re not 
worried about getting in shape. You’re focused on becoming the type of person 
who doesn’t miss workouts. 





At some point, once you’ve established the habit and you’re showing up each 
day, you can combine the Two-Minute Rule with a technique we call habit 
shaping to scale your habit back up toward your ultimate goal. Start by 
mastering the first two minutes of the smallest version of the behavior. Then, 
advance to an intermediate step and repeat the process—focusing on just the first 
two minutes and mastering that stage before moving on to the next level. 
Eventually, you’ll end up with the habit you had originally hoped to build while 
still keeping your focus where it should be: on the first two minutes of the 
behavior. 


EXAMPLES OF HABIT SHAPING 


Becoming an Early Riser 


Becoming Vegan 


Starting to Exercise 


Nearly any larger life goal can be transformed into a two-minute behavior. I 
want to live a healthy and long life &gt; I need to stay in shape &gt; I need to exercise 
&gt; I need to change into my workout clothes. I want to have a happy marriage &gt; I 
need to be a good partner &gt; I should do something each day to make my 
partner’s life easier &gt; I should meal plan for next week. 

Whenever you are struggling to stick with a habit, you can employ the Two- 
Minute Rule. It’s a simple way to make your habits easy. 


Chapter Summary 


14 


How to Make Good Habits Inevitable and Bad 
Habits Impossible 


I, me summer oF 1830, Victor Hugo was facing an impossible deadline. Twelve months 


earlier, the French author had promised his publisher a new book. But instead of 
writing, he spent that year pursuing other projects, entertaining guests, and 
delaying his work. Frustrated, Hugo’s publisher responded by setting a deadline 
less than six months away. The book had to be finished by February 1831. 

Hugo concocted a strange plan to beat his procrastination. He collected all of 
his clothes and asked an assistant to lock them away in a large chest. He was left 
with nothing to wear except a large shawl. Lacking any suitable clothing to go 
outdoors, he remained in his study and wrote furiously during the fall and winter 
of 1830. The Hunchback of Notre Dame was published two weeks early on 
January 14, 1831.* 





make it difficult. If you find yourself continually struggling to follow through on 
your plans, then you can take a page from Victor Hugo and make your bad 
habits more difficult by creating what psychologists call a commitment device. 


A commitment device is a choice you make in the present that controls your 
actions in the future. It is a way to lock in future behavior, bind you to good 
habits, and restrict you from bad ones. When Victor Hugo shut his clothes away 
so he could focus on writing, he was creating a commitment device.* 

There are many ways to create a commitment device. You can reduce 
overeating by purchasing food in individual packages rather than in bulk size. 
You can voluntarily ask to be added to the ° acide list at casinos and online 
poker sites to prevent future gambling sprees. Pve even heard of athletes who 









As another example, my friend and fellow habits expert Nir Eyal purchased an 
outlet timer, which is an adapter that he plugged in between his internet router 
and the power outlet. At 10 p.m. each night, the outlet timer cuts off the power to 
the router. When the internet goes off, everyone knows it is time to go to bed. 

Commitment devices are useful because they enable you to take advantage of 
good intentions before you can fall victim to temptation. Whenever I’m looking 
to cut calories, for example, I will ask the waiter to split my meal and box half of 
it to go before the meal is served. If I waited until the meal came out and told 
myself “Ill just eat half,” it would never work. 

The key is to change the task such that it requires more work to get out of the 
good habit than to get started on it. If you’re feeling motivated to get in shape, 
schedule a yoga session and pay ahead of time. If you’re excited about the 
business you want to start, email an entrepreneur you respect and set up a 
consulting call. When the time comes to act, the only way to bail is to cancel the 
gos which Sas effort and a cost mia 


ES However, we can do even 


better. We can make good habits inevitable and bad habits impossible. 





HOW TO AUTOMATE A HABIT AND NEVER THINK ABOUT IT 
AGAIN 


John Henry Patterson was born in Dayton, Ohio, in 1844. He spent his childhood 
doing chores on the family farm and working shifts at his father’s sawmill. After 
attending college at Dartmouth, Patterson returned to Ohio and opened a small 
supply store for coal miners. 

It seemed like a good opportunity. The store faced little competition and 
enjoyed a steady stream of customers, but still struggled to make money. That 
was when Patterson discovered his employees were stealing from him. 

In the mid-1800s, employee theft was a common problem. Receipts were kept 
in an open drawer and could easily be altered or discarded. There were no video 
cameras to review behavior and no software to track transactions. Unless you 
were willing to hover over your employees every minute of the day, or to 
manage all transactions yourself, it was difficult to prevent theft. 

As Patterson mulled over his predicament, he came across an advertisement 
for a new invention called Ritty’s Incorruptible Cashier. Designed by fellow 
Dayton resident James Ritty, it was the first cash register. The machine 
automatically locked the cash and receipts inside after each transaction. 


Patterson bought two for fifty dollars each. 

Employee theft at his store vanished overnight. In the next six months, 
Patterson’s business went from losing money to making $5,000 in profit—the 
equivalent of more than $100,000 today. 

Patterson was so impressed with the machine that he changed businesses. He 
bought the rights to Ritty’s invention and opened the National Cash Register 
Company. Ten years later, National Cash Register had over one thousand 
employees and was on its way to becoming one of the most successful 
businesses of its time. 

The best way to break a bad habit is to make it impractical to do. Increase the 
friction until you don’t even have the option to act. The brilliance of the cash 
register was that it automated ethical behavior by making stealing practically 
impossible. Rather than trying to change the employees, it made the preferred 
behavior automatic. 

Some actions—like installing a cash register—pay off again and again. These 
onetime choices require a little bit of effort up front but create increasing value 
over time. I’m fascinated by the idea that a single choice can deliver returns 
again and again, and I surveyed my readers on their favorite onetime actions that 
lead to better long-term habits. The table on the following page shares some of 
the most popular answers. 

Pd wager that if the average person were to simply do half of the onetime 
actions on this list—even if they didn’t give another thought to their habits— 
most would find themselves living a better life a year from now. These onetime 
actions are a straightforward way to employ the 3rd Law of Behavior Change. 
They make it easier to sleep well, eat healthy, be productive, save money, and 
generally live better. 


ONETIME ACTIONS THAT LOCK IN GOOD HABITS 


Buy a water filter to clean your drinking water. 


Use smaller plates to reduce caloric intake. 


Buy a good mattress. 
Get blackout curtains. 


Remove your television from your bedroom. 


Unsubscribe from emails. 
Turn off notifications and mute group chats. 
Set your phone to silent. 


Use email filters to clear up your inbox. 


Delete games and social media apps on your phone. 


Get a dog. 


Move to a friendly, social neighborhood. 


General Heal 


Get vaccinated. 
Buy good shoes to avoid back pain. 
Buy a supportive chair or standing desk. 


Enroll in an automatic savings plan. 
Set up automatic bill pay. 
Cut cable service. 


Ask service providers to lower your bills. 


Of course, there are many ways to automate good habits and eliminate bad 
ones. Typically, they involve putting technology to work for you. Technology 
can transform actions that were once hard, annoying, and complicated into 
behaviors that are easy, painless, and simple. It is the most reliable and effective 
way to guarantee the right behavior. 

This is particularly useful for behaviors that happen too infrequently to 
become habitual. Things you have to do monthly or yearly—like rebalancing 
your investment portfolio—are never repeated frequently enough to become a 
habit, so they benefit in particular from technology “remembering” to do them 
for you. 

Other examples include: 


° Medicine: Prescriptions can be automatically refilled. 
Personal finance: Employees can save for retirement with an automatic 
wage deduction. 


° Cooking: Meal-delivery services can do your grocery shopping. 
° Productivity: Social media browsing can be cut off with a website 
blocker. 


When you automate as much of your life as possible, you can spend your 
effort on the tasks machines cannot do yet. Each habit that we hand over to the 
authority of technology frees up time and energy to pour into the next stage of 
growth. As mathematician and philosopher Alfred North Whitehead wrote, 
“Civilization advances by extending the number of operations we can perform 
without thinking about them.” 


Of course, the power of technology can work against us as well. Binge- 
watching becomes a habit because you have to put more effort in to stop looking 
at the screen than to continue doing so. Instead of pressing a button to advance to 
the next episode, Netflix or YouTube will autoplay it for you. All you have to do 
is keep your eyes open. 

Technology creates a level of convenience that enables you to act on your 
smallest whims and desires. At the mere suggestion of hunger, you can have 
food delivered to your door. At the slightest hint of boredom, you can get lost in 
the vast expanse of social media. When the effort required to act on your desires 
becomes effectively zero, you can find yourself slipping into whatever impulse 
arises at the moment. The downside of automation is that we can find ourselves 
jumping from easy task to easy task without making time for more difficult, but 
ultimately more rewarding, work. 

I often find myself gravitating toward social media during any downtime. If I 
feel bored for just a fraction of a second, I reach for my phone. It’s easy to write 
off these minor distractions as “just taking a break,” but over time they can 
accumulate into a serious issue. The constant tug of “just one more minute” can 
prevent me from doing anything of consequence. (I’m not the only one. The 
average person spends over two hours per day on social media. What could you 
do with an extra six hundred hours per year?) 

During the year I was writing this book, I experimented with a new time 
management strategy. Every Monday, my assistant would reset the passwords on 
all my social media accounts, which logged me out on each device. All week I 
worked without distraction. On Friday, she would send me the new passwords. I 
had the entire weekend to enjoy what social media had to offer until Monday 
morning when she would do it again. (If you don’t have an assistant, team up 
with a friend or family member and reset each other’s passwords each week.) 

One of the biggest surprises was how quickly I adapted. Within the first week 
of locking myself out of social media, I realized that I didn’t need to check it 
nearly as often as I had been, and I certainly didn’t need it each day. It had 
simply been so easy that it had become the default. Once my bad habit became 
impossible, I discovered that I did actually have the motivation to work on more 
meaningful tasks. After I removed the mental candy from my environment, it 
became much easier to eat the healthy stuff. 

When working in your favor, automation can make your good habits 
inevitable and your bad habits impossible. It is the ultimate way to lock in future 
behavior rather than relying on willpower in the moment. By utilizing 
commitment devices, strategic onetime decisions, and technology, you can 
create an environment of inevitability—a space where good habits are not just an 


outcome you hope for but an outcome that is virtually guaranteed. 


Chapter Summary 


HOW TO CREATE A GOOD HABIT 


he 1st Law: Make It Obvious 


1.1: Fill out the Habits Scorecard. Write down your current habits to become aware of them. 
1.2: Use implementation intentions: “I will [BEHAVIOR] at [TIME] in [LOCATION].” 
1.3: Use habit stacking: “After [CURRENT HABIT], I will [NEW HABIT].” 


1.4: Design your environment. Make the cues of good habits obvious and visible. 


The 2nd Law: Make It Attractive 


2.1: Use temptation bundling. Pair an action you want to do with an action you need to do. 
2.2: Join a culture where your desired behavior is the normal behavior. 


2.3: Create a motivation ritual. Do something you enjoy immediately before a difficult habit. 


The 3rd Law: Make It Easy 


3.1: Reduce friction. Decrease the number of steps between you and your good habits. 

3.2: Prime the environment. Prepare your environment to make future actions easier. 

3.3: Master the decisive moment. Optimize the small choices that deliver outsized impact. 

3.4: Use the Two-Minute Rule. Downscale your habits until they can be done in two minutes or less. 


3.5: Automate your habits. Invest in technology and onetime purchases that lock in future behavior. 


he 4th Law: Make It Satisfying 


HOW TO BREAK A BAD HABIT 


Inversion of the 1st Law: Make It Invisible 


1.5: Reduce exposure. Remove the cues of your bad habits from your environment. 





Inversion of the 2nd Law: Make It Unattractive 


2.4: Reframe your mind-set. Highlight the benefits of avoiding your bad habits. 


Inversion of the 3rd Law: Make It Difficult 


3.6: Increase friction. Increase the number of steps between you and your bad habits. 
3.7: Use a commitment device. Restrict your future choices to the ones that benefit you. 


Inversion of the 4th Law: Make It Unsatisfying 


You can download a printable version of this habits cheat sheet at: atomichabits.com/cheatsheet 


THE 4TH LAW 


Make It Satisfying 


15 
The Cardinal Rule of Behavior Change 


I, me tate 1990s, A public health worker named Stephen Luby left his hometown of 


Omaha, Nebraska, and bought a one-way ticket to Karachi, Pakistan. 

Karachi was one of the most populous cities in the world. By 1998, over nine 
million people called it home. It was the economic center of Pakistan and a 
transportation hub, with some of the most active airports and seaports in the 
region. In the commercial parts of town, you could find all of the standard urban 
amenities and bustling downtown streets. But Karachi was also one of the least 
livable cities in the world. 

Over 60 percent of Karachi’s residents lived in squatter settlements and slums. 
These densely packed neighborhoods were filled with makeshift houses cobbled 
together from old boards, cinder blocks, and other discarded materials. There 
was no waste removal system, no electricity grid, no clean water supply. When 
dry, the streets were a combination of dust and trash. When wet, they became a 
muddy pit of sewage. Mosquito colonies thrived in pools of stagnant water, and 
children played among the garbage. 

The unsanitary conditions lead to widespread illness and disease. 
Contaminated water sources caused epidemics of diarrhea, vomiting, and 
abdominal pain. Nearly one third of the children living there were malnourished. 
With so many people crammed into such a small space, viruses and bacterial 
infections spread rapidly. It was this public health crisis that had brought 
Stephen Luby to Pakistan. 

Luby and his team realized that in an environment with poor sanitation, the 
simple habit of washing your hands could make a real difference in the health of 
the residents. But they soon discovered that many people were already aware 
that handwashing was important. 

And yet, despite this knowledge, many residents were washing their hands in 
a haphazard fashion. Some people would just run their hands under the water 


quickly. Others would only wash one hand. Many would simply forget to wash 
their hands before preparing food. Everyone said handwashing was important, 
but few people made a habit out of it. The problem wasn’t knowledge. The 
problem was consistency. 

That was when Luby and his team partnered with Procter &amp; Gamble to supply 
the neighborhood with Safeguard soap. Compared to your standard bar of soap, 
using Safeguard was a more enjoyable experience. 

“In Pakistan, Safeguard was a premium soap,” Luby told me. “The study 
participants commonly mentioned how much they liked it.” The soap foamed 
easily, and people were able to lather their hands with suds. It smelled great. 
Instantly, handwashing became slightly more pleasurable. 

“T see the goal of handwashing promotion not as behavior change but as habit 
adoption,” Luby said. “It is a lot easier for people to adopt a product that 
provides a strong positive sensory signal, for example the mint taste of 
toothpaste, than it is to adopt a habit that does not provide pleasurable sensory 
feedback, like flossing one’s teeth. The marketing team at Procter &amp; Gamble 
talked about trying to create a positive handwashing experience.” 

Within months, the researchers saw a rapid shift in the health of children in 
the neighborhood. The rate of diarrhea fell by 52 percent; pneumonia by 48 
percent; and impetigo, a bacterial skin infection, by 35 percent. 

The long-term effects were even better. “We went back to some of the 
households in Karachi six years after,’ Luby told me. “Over 95 percent of 
households who had been given the soap for free and encouraged to wash their 
hands had a handwashing station with soap and water available when our study 
team visited. .. . We had not given any soap to the intervention group for over 
five years, but during the trial they had become so habituated to wash their 
hands, that they had maintained the practice.” It was a powerful example of the 
fourth and final Law of Behavior Change: make it satisfying. 

We are more likely to repeat a behavior when the experience is satisfying. 
This is entirely logical. Feelings of pleasure—even minor ones like washing 
your hands with soap that smells nice and lathers well—are signals that tell the 
brain: “This feels good. Do this again, next time.” Pleasure teaches your brain 
that a behavior is worth remembering and repeating. 

Take the story of chewing gum. Chewing gum had been sold commercially 
throughout the 1800s, but it wasn’t until Wrigley launched in 1891 that it 
became a worldwide habit. Early versions were made from relatively bland 
resins—chewy, but not tasty. Wrigley revolutionized the industry by adding 
flavors like Spearmint and Juicy Fruit, which made the product flavorful and fun 
to use. Then they went a step further and began pushing chewing gum as a 


pathway to a clean mouth. Advertisements told readers to “Refresh Your Taste.” 

Tasty flavors and the feeling of a fresh mouth provided little bits of immediate 
reinforcement and made the product satisfying to use. Consumption skyrocketed, 
and Wrigley became the largest chewing gum company in the world. 

Toothpaste had a similar trajectory. Manufacturers enjoyed great success 
when they added flavors like spearmint, peppermint, and cinnamon to their 
products. These flavors don’t improve the effectiveness of toothpaste. They 
simply create a “clean mouth” feel and make the experience of brushing your 
teeth more pleasurable. My wife actually stopped using Sensodyne because she 
didn’t like the aftertaste. She switched to a brand with a stronger mint flavor, 
which proved to be more satisfying. 

Conversely, if an experience is not satisfying, we have little reason to repeat 
it. In my research, I came across the story of a woman who had a narcissistic 
relative who drove her nuts. In an attempt to spend less time with this 
egomaniac, she acted as dull and as boring as possible whenever he was around. 
Within a few encounters, he started avoiding her because he found her so 
uninteresting. 

Stories like these are evidence of the Cardinal Rule of Behavior Change: What 
is rewarded is repeated. What is punished is avoided. You learn what to do in 
the future based on what you were rewarded for doing (or punished for doing) in 
the past. Positive emotions cultivate habits. Negative emotions destroy them. 

The first three laws of behavior change—make it obvious, make it attractive, 
and make it easy—increase the odds that a behavior will be performed this time. 
The fourth law of behavior change—make it satisfying—increases the odds that 
a behavior will be repeated next time. It completes the habit loop. 

But there is a trick. We are not looking for just any type of satisfaction. We 
are looking for immediate satisfaction. 


THE MISMATCH BETWEEN IMMEDIATE AND DELAYED 
REWARDS 


Imagine you’re an animal roaming the plains of Africa—a giraffe or an elephant 
or a lion. On any given day, most of your decisions have an immediate impact. 
You are always thinking about what to eat or where to sleep or how to avoid a 
predator. You are constantly focused on the present or the very near future. You 
live in what scientists call an immediate-return environment because your 
actions instantly deliver clear and immediate outcomes. 

Now switch back to your human self. In modern society, many of the choices 


you make today will not benefit you immediately. If you do a good job at work, 
you’ll get a paycheck in a few weeks. If you exercise today, perhaps you won’t 
be overweight next year. If you save money now, maybe you’! have enough for 
retirement decades from now. You live in what scientists call a delayed-return 
environment because you can work for years before your actions deliver the 
intended payoff. 

The human brain did not evolve for life in a delayed-return environment. The 
earliest remains of modern humans, known as Homo sapiens sapiens, are 
approximately two hundred thousand years old. These were the first humans to 
have a brain relatively similar to ours. In particular, the neocortex—the newest 
part of the brain and the region responsible for higher functions like language— 
was roughly the same size two hundred thousand years ago as today. You are 
walking around with the same hardware as your Paleolithic ancestors. 

It is only recently—during the last five hundred years or so—that society has 
shifted to a predominantly delayed-return environment.* Compared to the age of 
the brain, modern society is brand-new. In the last one hundred years, we have 
seen the rise of the car, the airplane, the television, the personal computer, the 
internet, the smartphone, and Beyoncé. The world has changed much in recent 
years, but human nature has changed little. 

Similar to other animals on the African savannah, our ancestors spent their 
days responding to grave threats, securing the next meal, and taking shelter from 
a storm. It made sense to place a high value on instant gratification. The distant 
future was less of a concern. And after thousands of generations in an 
immediate-return environment, our brains evolved to prefer quick payoffs to 
long-term ones. 

Behavioral economists refer to this tendency as time inconsistency. That is, 
the way your brain evaluates rewards is inconsistent across time.* You value the 
present more than the future. Usually, this tendency serves us well. A reward 
that is certain right now is typically worth more than one that is merely possible 
in the future. But occasionally, our bias toward instant gratification causes 
problems. 

Why would someone smoke if they know it increases the risk of lung cancer? 
Why would someone overeat when they know it increases their risk of obesity? 
Why would someone have unsafe sex if they know it can result in sexually 
transmitted disease? Once you understand how the brain prioritizes rewards, the 
answers become clear: the consequences of bad habits are delayed while the 
rewards are immediate. Smoking might kill you in ten years, but it reduces stress 
and eases your nicotine cravings now. Overeating is harmful in the long run but 
appetizing in the moment. Sex—safe or not—provides pleasure right away. 


Disease and infection won’t show up for days or weeks, even years. 

Every habit produces multiple outcomes across time. Unfortunately, these 
outcomes are often misaligned. With our bad habits, the immediate outcome 
usually feels good, but the ultimate outcome feels bad. With good habits, it is the 
reverse: the immediate outcome is unenjoyable, but the ultimate outcome feels 
good. The French economist Frédéric Bastiat explained the problem clearly 
when he wrote, “It almost always happens that when the immediate consequence 
is favorable, the later consequences are disastrous, and vice versa. . . . Often, the 
sweeter the first fruit of a habit, the more bitter are its later fruits.” 

Put another way, the costs of your good habits are in the present. The costs of 
your bad habits are in the future. 

The brain’s tendency to prioritize the present moment means you can’t rely on 
good intentions. When you make a plan—to lose weight, write a book, or learn a 
language—you are actually making plans for your future self. And when you 
envision what you want your life to be like, it is easy to see the value in taking 
actions with long-term benefits. We all want better lives for our future selves. 
However, when the moment of decision arrives, instant gratification usually 
wins. You are no longer making a choice for Future You, who dreams of being 
fitter or wealthier or happier. You are choosing for Present You, who wants to be 
full, pampered, and entertained. As a general rule, the more immediate pleasure 
you get from an action, the more strongly you should question whether it aligns 
with your long-term goals.* 

With a fuller understanding of what causes our brain to repeat some behaviors 
and avoid others, let’s update the Cardinal Rule of Behavior Change: What is 
immediately rewarded is repeated. What is immediately punished is avoided. 

Our preference for instant gratification reveals an important truth about 
success: because of how we are wired, most people will spend all day chasing 
quick hits of satisfaction. The road less traveled is the road of delayed 
gratification. If you’re willing to wait for the rewards, you’ll face less 
competition and often get a bigger payoff. As the saying goes, the last mile is 
always the least crowded. 

This is precisely what research has shown. People who are better at delaying 
gratification have higher SAT scores, lower levels of substance abuse, lower 
likelihood of obesity, better responses to stress, and superior social skills. We’ve 
all seen this play out in our own lives. If you delay watching television and get 
your homework done, you’ll generally learn more and get better grades. If you 
don’t buy desserts and chips at the store, you’ll often eat healthier food when 
you get home. At some point, success in nearly every field requires you to ignore 
an immediate reward in favor of a delayed reward. 


Here’s the problem: most people know that delaying gratification is the wise 
approach. They want the benefits of good habits: to be healthy, productive, at 
peace. But these outcomes are seldom top-of-mind at the decisive moment. 
Thankfully, it’s possible to train yourself to delay gratification—but you need to 
work with the grain of human nature, not against it. The best way to do this is to 
add a little bit of immediate pleasure to the habits that pay off in the long-run 
and a little bit of immediate pain to ones that don’t. 


HOW TO TURN INSTANT GRATIFICATION TO YOUR ADVANTAGE 


The vital thing in getting a habit to stick is to feel successful—even if it’s in a 
small way. The feeling of success is a signal that your habit paid off and that the 
work was worth the effort. 

In a perfect world, the reward for a good habit is the habit itself. In the real 
world, good habits tend to feel worthwhile only after they have provided you 
with something. Early on, it’s all sacrifice. You’ve gone to the gym a few times, 
but you’re not stronger or fitter or faster—at least, not in any noticeable sense. 
It’s only months later, once you shed a few pounds or your arms gain some 
definition, that it becomes easier to exercise for its own sake. In the beginning, 
you need a reason to stay on track. This is why immediate rewards are essential. 
They keep you excited while the delayed rewards accumulate in the background. 

What we’re really talking about here—when we’re discussing immediate 
rewards—is the ending of a behavior. The ending of any experience is vital 
because we tend to remember it more than other phases. You want the ending of 
your habit to be satisfying. The best approach is to use reinforcement, which 
refers to the process of using an immediate reward to increase the rate of a 
behavior. Habit stacking, which we covered in Chapter 5, ties your habit to an 
immediate cue, which makes it obvious when to start. Reinforcement ties your 
habit to an immediate reward, which makes it satisfying when you finish. 

Immediate reinforcement can be especially helpful when dealing with habits 
of avoidance, which are behaviors you want to stop doing. It can be challenging 
to stick with habits like “no frivolous purchases” or “no alcohol this month” 
because nothing happens when you skip happy hour drinks or don’t buy that pair 
of shoes. It can be hard to feel satisfied when there is no action in the first place. 
All you’re doing is resisting temptation, and there isn’t much satisfying about 
that. 

One solution is to turn the situation on its head. You want to make avoidance 
visible. Open a savings account and label it for something you want—maybe 


“Leather Jacket.” Whenever you pass on a purchase, put the same amount of 
money in the account. Skip your morning latte? Transfer $5. Pass on another 
month of Netflix? Move $10 over. It’s like creating a loyalty program for 
yourself. The immediate reward of seeing yourself save money toward the 
leather jacket feels a lot better than being deprived. You are making it satisfying 
to do nothing. 

One of my readers and his wife used a similar setup. They wanted to stop 
eating out so much and start cooking together more. They labeled their savings 
account “Trip to Europe.” Whenever they skipped going out to eat, they 
transferred $50 into the account. At the end of the year, they put the money 
toward the vacation. 

It is worth noting that it is important to select short-term rewards that 
reinforce your identity rather than ones that conflict with it. Buying a new jacket 
is fine if you’re trying to lose weight or read more books, but it doesn’t work if 
you’re trying to budget and save money. Instead, taking a bubble bath or going 
on a leisurely walk are good examples of rewarding yourself with free time, 
which aligns with your ultimate goal of more freedom and financial 
independence. Similarly, if your reward for exercising is eating a bowl of ice 
cream, then you’re casting votes for conflicting identities, and it ends up being a 
wash. Instead, maybe your reward is a massage, which is both a luxury and a 
vote toward taking care of your body. Now the short-term reward is aligned with 
your long-term vision of being a healthy person. 

Eventually, as intrinsic rewards like a better mood, more energy, and reduced 
stress kick in, you’ll become less concerned with chasing the secondary reward. 
The identity itself becomes the reinforcer. You do it because it’s who you are 
and it feels good to be you. The more a habit becomes part of your life, the less 
you need outside encouragement to follow through. Incentives can start a habit. 
Identity sustains a habit. 

That said, it takes time for the evidence to accumulate and a new identity to 
emerge. Immediate reinforcement helps maintain motivation in the short term 
while you’re waiting for the long-term rewards to arrive. 

In summary, a habit needs to be enjoyable for it to last. Simple bits of 
reinforcement—like soap that smells great or toothpaste that has a refreshing 
mint flavor or seeing $50 hit your savings account—can offer the immediate 
pleasure you need to enjoy a habit. And change is easy when it is enjoyable. 


Chapter Summary 


16 
How to Stick with Good Habits Every Day 


I. 13, a bank in Abbotsford, Canada, hired a twenty-three-year-old stockbroker 


named Trent Dyrsmid. Abbotsford was a relatively small suburb, tucked away in 
the shadow of nearby Vancouver, where most of the big business deals were 
being made. Given the location, and the fact that Dyrsmid was a rookie, nobody 
expected too much of him. But he made brisk progress thanks to a simple daily 
habit. 

Dyrsmid began each morning with two jars on his desk. One was filled with 
120 paper clips. The other was empty. As soon as he settled in each day, he 
would make a sales call. Immediately after, he would move one paper clip from 
the full jar to the empty jar and the process would begin again. “Every morning I 
would start with 120 paper clips in one jar and I would keep dialing the phone 
until I had moved them all to the second jar,” he told me. 

Within eighteen months, Dyrsmid was bringing in $5 million to the firm. By 
age twenty-four, he was making $75,000 per year—the equivalent of $125,000 
today. Not long after, he landed a six-figure job with another company. 

T like to refer to this technique as the Paper Clip Strategy and, over the years, 

One woman 
shifted a hairpin from one container to another whenever she wrote a page of her 
book. Another man moved a marble from one bin to the next after each set of 
push-ups. 

Making progress is satisfying, and visual measures—like moving paper clips 

As a result, 
they reinforce your behavior and add a little bit of immediate satisfaction to any 
activity. Visual measurement comes in many forms: food journals, workout logs, 
loyalty punch cards, the progress bar on a software download, even the page 
numbers in a book. But perhaps the best way to measure your progress is with a 
habit tracker. 


HOW TO KEEP YOUR HABITS ON TRACK 


A habit tracker is a simple way to measure whether you did a habit. The most) 





(routine. For example, if you meditate on Monday, Wednesday, and Friday, each 
of those dates gets an X. As time rolls by, the calendar becomes a record of your 
habit streak. 

Countless people have tracked their habits, but perhaps the most famous was 
Benjamin Franklin. Beginning at age twenty, Franklin carried a small booklet 
everywhere he went and used it to track thirteen personal virtues. This list 
included goals like “Lose no time. Be always employed in something useful” 
and “Avoid trifling conversation.” At the end of each day, Franklin would open 
his booklet and record his progress. 

Jerry Seinfeld reportedly uses a habit tracker to stick with his streak of writing 
jokes. In the documentary Comedian, he explains that his goal is simply to 
“never break the chain” of writing jokes every day. In other words, he is not 
focused on how good or bad a particular joke is or how inspired he feels. He is 
simply focused on showing up and adding to his streak. 

Don’t break the chain of sales 
calls and you’ll build a successful book of business. Don’t break the chain of 
workouts and you’ll get fit faster than you’d expect. Don’t break the chain of 
creating every day and you will end up with an impressive portfolio. Habit 


Let’s break down each one. 


Benefit #1: Habit tracking is obvious. 


Habit 
tracking naturally builds a series of visual cues like the streak of X’s on your 
calendar or the list of meals in your food log. When you look at the calendar and 
see your streak, you’ll be reminded to act again. Research has shown that people 
who track their progress on goals like losing weight, quitting smoking, and 
lowering blood pressure are all more likely to improve than those who don’t. 
One study of more than sixteen hundred people found that those who kept a 
daily food log lost twice as much weight as those who did not. The mere act of 
tracking a behavior can spark the urge to change it. 

Habit tracking also keeps you honest. Most of us have a distorted view of our 
own behavior. We think we act better than we do. Measurement offers one way 


to overcome our blindness to our own behavior and notice what’s really going 
on each day. One glance at the paper clips in the container and you immediately 
know how much work you have (or haven’t) been putting in. When the evidence 
is right in front of you, you’re less likely to lie to yourself. 


Benefit #2: Habit tracking is attractive. 







Benefit #3: Habit tracking is satisfying. 


This is the most crucial benefit of all. Tracking can become its own form of 
reward. It is satisfying to cross an item off your to-do list, to complete an entry 
It feels good to watch your 
results grow—the size of your investment portfolio, the length of your book 
manuscript—and if it feels good, then you’re more likely to endure. 

Habit tracking also helps keep your eye on the ball: you’re focused on the 
process rather than the result. You’re not fixated on getting six-pack abs, you’re 
just trying to keep the streak alive and become the type of person who doesn’t 
miss workouts. 

In summary, 





Furthermore, habit tracking provides visual 
proof that you are casting votes for the type of person you wish to become, 
which is a delightful form of immediate and intrinsic gratification.* 

You may be wondering, if habit tracking is so useful, why have I waited so 
long to talk about it? 

Despite all the benefits, I’ve left this discussion until now for a simple reason: 
many people resist the idea of tracking and measuring. It can feel like a burden 





because it forces you into two habits: the habit you’re trying to build and the 
habit of tracking it. Counting calories sounds like a hassle when you’re already 
struggling to follow a diet. Writing down every sales call seems tedious when 
you’ve got work to do. It feels easier to say, “I'll just eat less.” Or, “PI try 
harder.” Or, “I’ll remember to do it.” People inevitably tell me things like, “I 
have a decision journal, but I wish I used it more.” Or, “I recorded my workouts 
for a week, but then quit.” I’ve been there myself. I once made a food log to 
track my calories. I managed to do it for one meal and then gave up. 


What can we do to make tracking easier? 

First, whenever possible, measurement should be automated. You’ll probably 
be surprised by how much you’re already tracking without knowing it. Your 
credit card statement tracks how often you go out to eat. Your Fitbit registers 
how many steps you take and how long you sleep. Your calendar records how 
many new places you travel to each year. Once you know where to get the data, 
add a note to your calendar to review it each week or each month, which is more 
practical than tracking it every day. 

Second, manual tracking should be limited to your most important habits. It is 
better to consistently track one habit than to sporadically track ten. 

Finally, record each measurement immediately after the habit occurs. The 
completion of the behavior is the cue to write it down. This approach allows you 
to combine the habitstacking method mentioned in Chapter 5 with habit tracking. 


° After I hang up the phone from a sales call, I will move one paper clip 
over. 

° After I finish each set at the gym, I will record it in my workout 
journal. 

° After I put my plate in the dishwasher, I will write down what I ate. 


These tactics can make tracking your habits easier. Even if you aren’t the type 
of person who enjoys recording your behavior, I think yov’ll find a few weeks of 
measurements to be insightful. It’s always interesting to see how you’ve actually 


been spending your time. 

That said, every habit streak ends at some point. And, more important than 
any single measurement, is having a good plan for when your habits slide off 
track. 


HOW TO RECOVER QUICKLY WHEN YOUR HABITS BREAK DOWN 


Before long, an 
emergency will pop up—you get sick or you have to travel for work or your 
family needs a little more of your time. 

Whenever this happens to me, I try to remind myself of a simple rule} mever) 


Maybe Pll eat an 
entire pizza, but Pll follow it up with a healthy meal. I can’t be perfect, but I can 
avoid a second lapse. As soon as one streak ends, I get started on the next one. 








This is a distinguishing feature between winners and losers. Anyone can have 
a bad performance, a bad workout, or a bad day at work. But when successful) 








I think this principle is so important that Ill stick to it even if I can’t do a 
habit as well or as completely as I would like. Too often, we fall into an all-or- 
nothing cycle with our habits. The problem is not slipping up; the problem is 
thinking that if you can’t do something perfectly, then you shouldn’t do it at all. 

You don’t realize how valuable it is to just show up on your bad (or busy) 
days. Lost days hurt you more than successful days help you. If you start with 
$100, then a 50 percent gain will take you to $150. But you only need a 33 
percent loss to take you back to $100. In other words, avoiding a 33 percent loss 


is just as valuable as achieving a 50 percent gain. As Charlie Munger says, “The 


This is why the “bad” workouts are often the most important ones. Sluggish 
days and bad workouts maintain the compound gains you accrued from previous 
good days. Simply doing something—ten squats, five sprints, a push-up, 
anything really—is huge. Don’t put up a zero. Don’t let losses eat into your 





compounding. 

Furthermore, it’s not always about what happens during the workout. It’s 
about being the type of person who doesn’t miss workouts. It’s easy to train 
when you feel good, but it’s crucial to show up when you don’t feel like it— 
even if you do less than you hope. Going to the gym for five minutes may not 
improve your performance, but it reaffirms your identity. 

The all-or-nothing cycle of behavior change is just one pitfall that can derail 
your habits. Another potential danger—especially if you are using a habit tracker 
—is measuring the wrong thing. 


KNOWING WHEN (AND WHEN NOT) TO TRACK A HABIT 


Say you’re running a restaurant and you want to know if your chef is doing a 
good job. One way to measure success is to track how many customers pay for a 
meal each day. If more customers come in, the food must be good. If fewer 
customers come in, something must be wrong. 

However, this one measurement—daily revenue—only gives a limited picture 
of what’s really going on. Just because someone pays for a meal doesn’t mean 
they enjoy the meal. Even dissatisfied customers are unlikely to dine and dash. 
In fact, if you’re only measuring revenue, the food might be getting worse but 
you’re making up for it with marketing or discounts or some other method. 
Instead, it may be more effective to track how many customers finish their meal 
or perhaps the percentage of customers who leave a generous tip. 


{the number rather"than the purpose behind it If your success is measured by 


quarterly earnings, you will optimize sales, revenue, and accounting for 
quarterly earnings. If your success is measured by a lower number on the scale, 
you will optimize for a lower number on the scale, even if that means embracing 


crash diets, juice cleanses, and fat-loss pills. The human mind wants to “win” 


This pitfall is evident in many areas of life. We focus on working long hours 


instead of getting meaningful work done. (We) care more about getting ten) 
(iomsantelisiepsitttanwerelo/aboublibeine healthy We lteachifonetandarizeditests) 


This is sometimes referred to as Goodhart’s Law. Named after the economist 


Charles Goodhart, the principle states, “When a measure becomes a target) it 



















(ceases to be a good measure.”) Measurement is only useful when it guides you 


and adds context to a larger picture, not when it consumes you. Each number is 
simply one piece of feedback in the overall system. 

In our data-driven world, we tend to overvalue numbers and undervalue 
anything ephemeral, soft, and difficult to quantify. We mistakenly think the 
factors we can measure are the only factors that exist. But just because you can 
measure something doesn’t mean it’s the most important thing. And just because 
you can’t measure something doesn’t mean it’s not important at all. 

All of this to say, it’s crucial to keep habit tracking in its proper place. It can 
feel satisfying to record a habit and track your progress, but the measurement is 
not the only thing that matters. Furthermore, there are many ways to measure 
progress, and sometimes it helps to shift your focus to something entirely 
different. 

This is why nonscale victories can be effective for weight loss. The number 
on the scale may be stubborn, so if you focus solely on that number, your 
motivation will sag. But you may notice that your skin looks better or you wake 
up earlier or your sex drive got a boost. All of these are valid ways to track your 
improvement. 





Each measurement provides a little bit 
of evidence that you’re moving in the right direction and a brief moment of 
immediate pleasure for a job well done. 


Chapter Summary 






17 


How an Accountability Partner Can Change 
Everything 


AS servinc asa Pilot in World War II, Roger Fisher attended Harvard Law School 


and spent thirty-four years specializing in negotiation and conflict management. 
He founded the Harvard Negotiation Project and worked with numerous 
countries and world leaders on peace resolutions, hostage crises, and diplomatic 
compromises. But it was in the 1970s and 1980s, as the threat of nuclear war 
escalated, that Fisher developed perhaps his most interesting idea. 

At the time, Fisher was focused on designing strategies that could prevent 
nuclear war, and he had noticed a troubling fact. Any sitting president would 
have access to launch codes that could kill millions of people but would never 
actually see anyone die because he would always be thousands of miles away. 

“My suggestion was quite simple,” he wrote in 1981. “Put that [nuclear] code 
number in a little capsule, and then implant that capsule right next to the heart of 
a volunteer. The volunteer would carry with him a big, heavy butcher knife as he 
accompanied the President. If ever the President wanted to fire nuclear weapons, 
the only way he could do so would be for him first, with his own hands, to kill 
one human being. The President says, ‘George, I’m sorry but tens of millions 
must die.’ He has to look at someone and realize what death is—what an 
innocent death is. Blood on the White House carpet. It’s reality brought home. 

“When I suggested this to friends in the Pentagon they said, ‘My God, that’s 
terrible. Having to kill someone would distort the President’s judgment. He 
might never push the button.’” 

Throughout our discussion of the 4th Law of Behavior Change we have 
covered the importance of making good habits immediately satisfying. Fisher’s 
proposal is an inversion of the 4th Law: Make itimmediately unsatisfying. 

Just as we are more likely to repeat an experience when the ending is 
satisfying, we are also more likely to avoid an experience when the ending is 


painful. Pain is an effective teacher. If a failure is painful, it gets fixed. If a 
failure is relatively painless, it gets ignored. The more immediate and more 
costly a mistake is, the faster you will learn from it. The threat of a bad review 
forces a plumber to be good at his job. The possibility of a customer never 
returning makes restaurants create good food. The cost of cutting the wrong 
blood vessel makes a surgeon master human anatomy and cut carefully. When 
the consequences are severe, people learn quickly. 

The more immediate the pain, the less likely the behavior. If you want to 
prevent bad habits and eliminate unhealthy behaviors, then adding an instant cost 
to the action is a great way to reduce their odds. 

We repeat bad habits because they serve us in some way, and that makes them 
hard to abandon. The best way I know to overcome this predicament is to 
increase the speed of the punishment associated with the behavior. There can’t 
be a gap between the action and the consequences. 

As soon as actions incur an immediate consequence, behavior begins to 
change. Customers pay their bills on time when they are charged a late fee. 
Students show up to class when their grade is linked to attendance. We’ll jump 
through a lot of hoops to avoid a little bit of immediate pain. 

There is, of course, a limit to this. If you’re going to rely on punishment to 
change behavior, then the strength of the punishment must match the relative 
strength of the behavior it is trying to correct. To be productive, the cost of 
procrastination must be greater than the cost of action. To be healthy, the cost of 
laziness must be greater than the cost of exercise. Getting fined for smoking in a 
restaurant or failing to recycle adds consequence to an action. Behavior only 
shifts if the punishment is painful enough and reliably enforced. 

In general, the more local, tangible, concrete, and immediate the consequence, 
the more likely it is to influence individual behavior. The more global, 
intangible, vague, and delayed the consequence, the less likely it is to influence 
individual behavior. 

Thankfully, there is a straightforward way to add an immediate cost to any 
bad habit: create a habit contract. 


THE HABIT CONTRACT 


The first seat belt law was passed in New York on December 1, 1984. At the 
time, just 14 percent of people in the United States regularly wore a seat belt— 
but that was all about to change. 

Within five years, over half of the nation had seat belt laws. Today, wearing a 


seat belt is enforceable by law in forty-nine of the fifty states. And it’s not just 
the legislation, the number of people wearing seat belts has changed dramatically 
as well. In 2016, over 88 percent of Americans buckled up each time they got in 
a car. In just over thirty years, there was a complete reversal in the habits of 
millions of people. 

Laws and regulations are an example of how government can change our 
habits by creating a social contract. As a society, we collectively agree to abide 
by certain rules and then enforce them as a group. Whenever a new piece of 
legislation impacts behavior—seat belt laws, banning smoking inside 
restaurants, mandatory recycling—it is an example of a social contract shaping 
our habits. The group agrees to act in a certain way, and if you don’t follow 
along, you’ll be punished. 

Just as governments use laws to hold citizens accountable, you can create a 
habit contract to hold yourself accountable. A habit contract is a verbal or 
written agreement in which you state your commitment to a particular habit and 
the punishment that will occur if you don’t follow through. Then you find one or 
two people to act as your accountability partners and sign off on the contract 
with you. 

Bryan Harris, an entrepreneur from Nashville, Tennessee, was the first person 
I saw put this strategy into action. Shortly after the birth of his son, Harris 
realized he wanted to shed a few pounds. He wrote up a habit contract between 
himself, his wife, and his personal trainer. The first version read, “Bryan’s #1 
objective for Q1 of 2017 is to start eating correctly again so he feels better, looks 
better, and is able to hit his long-term goal of 200 pounds at 10% body fat.” 

Below that statement, Harris laid out a road map for achieving his ideal 
outcome: 


e Phase #1: Get back to a strict “slow-carb” diet in Q1. 

e Phase #2: Start a strict macronutrient tracking program in Q2. 

e Phase #3: Refine and maintain the details of his diet and workout 
program in Q3. 


Finally, he wrote out each of the daily habits that would get him to his goal. 
For example, “Write down all food that he consumes each day and weigh 
himself each day.” 

And then he listed the punishment if he failed: “If Bryan doesn’t do these two 
items then the following consequence will be enforced: He will have to dress up 


each workday and each Sunday morning for the rest of the quarter. Dress up is 
defined as not wearing jeans, t-shirts, hoodies, or shorts. He will also give Joey 
(his trainer) $200 to use as he sees fit if he misses one day of logging food.” 

At the bottom of the page, Harris, his wife, and his trainer all signed the 
contract. 

My initial reaction was that a contract like this seemed overly formal and 
unnecessary, especially the signatures. But Harris convinced me that signing the 
contract was an indication of seriousness. “Anytime I skip this part,” he said, “I 
start slacking almost immediately.” 

Three months later, after hitting his targets for Q1, Harris upgraded his goals. 
The consequences escalated, too. If he missed his carbohydrate and protein 
targets, he had to pay his trainer $100. And if he failed to weigh himself, he had 
to give his wife $500 to use as she saw fit. Perhaps most painfully, if he forgot to 
run sprints, he had to dress up for work every day and wear an Alabama hat the 
rest of the quarter—the bitter rival of his beloved Auburn team. 

The strategy worked. With his wife and trainer acting as accountability 
partners and with the habit contract clarifying exactly what to do each day, 
Harris lost the weight.* 

To make bad habits unsatisfying, your best option is to make them painful in 
the moment. Creating a habit contract is a straightforward way to do exactly that. 

Even if you don’t want to create a full-blown habit contract, simply having an 
accountability partner is useful. The comedian Margaret Cho writes a joke or 
song every day. She does the “song a day” challenge with a friend, which helps 
them both stay accountable. Knowing that someone is watching can be a 
powerful motivator. You are less likely to procrastinate or give up because there 
is an immediate cost. If you don’t follow through, perhaps they’ll see you as 
untrustworthy or lazy. Suddenly, you are not only failing to uphold your 
promises to yourself, but also failing to uphold your promises to others. 

You can even automate this process. Thomas Frank, an entrepreneur in 
Boulder, Colorado, wakes up at 5:55 each morning. And if he doesn’t, he has a 
tweet automatically scheduled that says, “It’s 6:10 and I’m not up because I’m 
lazy! Reply to this for $5 via PayPal (limit 5), assuming my alarm didn’t 
malfunction.” 

We are always trying to present our best selves to the world. We comb our 
hair and brush our teeth and dress ourselves carefully because we know these 
habits are likely to get a positive reaction. We want to get good grades and 
graduate from top schools to impress potential employers and mates and our 
friends and family. We care about the opinions of those around us because it 
helps if others like us. This is precisely why getting an accountability partner or 


signing a habit contract can work so well. 


Chapter Summary 


HOW TO CREATE A GOOD HABIT 


he 1st Law: Make It Obvious 


1.1: Fill out the Habits Scorecard. Write down your current habits to become aware of them. 
1.2: Use implementation intentions: “I will [BEHAVIOR] at [TIME] in [LOCATION].” 
1.3: Use habit stacking: “After [CURRENT HABIT], I will [NEW HABIT].” 


1.4: Design your environment. Make the cues of good habits obvious and visible. 


The 2nd Law:Make It Attractive 


2.1: Use temptation bundling, Pair an action you want to do with an action you need to do. 
2.2: Join a culture where your desired behavior is the normal behavior. 


2.3: Create a motivation ritual. Do something you enjoy immediately before a difficult habit. 


The 3rd Law: Make It Easy 


3.1: Reduce friction. Decrease the number of steps between you and your good habits. 

3.2: Prime the environment. Prepare your environment to make future actions easier. 

3.3: Master the decisive moment. Optimize the small choices that deliver outsized impact. 

3.4: Use the Two-Minute Rule. Downscale your habits until they can be done in two minutes or less. 


3.5: Automate your habits. Invest in technology and onetime purchases that lock in future behavior. 


he 4th Law: Make It Satisfying 


4.1: Use reinforcement. Give yourself an immediate reward when you complete your habit. 

4.2: Make “doing nothing” enjoyable. When avoiding a bad habit, design a way to see the benefits. 
4.3: Use a habit tracker. Keep track of your habit streak and “don’t break the chain.” 

4.4: Never miss twice. When you forget to do a habit, make sure you get back on track immediately. 


HOW TO BREAK A BAD HABIT 


Inversion of the 1st Law: Make It Invisibl
e 


1.5: Reduce exposure. Remove the cues of your bad habits from your environment. 


Inversion of the 2nd Law: Make It Unattractive 


2.4: Reframe your mind-set. Highlight the benefits of avoiding your bad habits. 


Inversion of the 3rd Law: Make It Difficult 


3.6: Increase friction. Increase the number of steps between you and your bad habits. 


3.7: Use a commitment device. Restrict your future choices to the ones that benefit you. 


Inversion of the 4th Law: Make It Unsatisfying 


4.5: Get an accountability partner. Ask someone to watch your behavior. 
4.6: Create a habit contract. Make the costs of your bad habits public and painful. 


You can download a printable version of this habits cheat sheet at: atomichabits.com/cheatsheet 


ADVANCED TACTICS 


How to Go from Being Merely Good to Being 
Truly Great 


18 


The Truth About Talent (When Genes Matter 
and When They Don’t) 


M sso are familiar with Michael Phelps, who is widely considered to be one of 


the greatest athletes in history. Phelps has won more Olympic medals not only 
than any swimmer but also more than any Olympian in any sport. 

Fewer people know the name Hicham El Guerrouj, but he was a fantastic 
athlete in his own right. El Guerrouj is a Moroccan runner who holds two 
Olympic gold medals and is one of the greatest middle-distance runners of all 
time. For many years, he held the world record in the mile, 1,500-meter, and 
2,000-meter races. At the Olympic Games in Athens, Greece, in 2004, he won 
gold in the 1,500-meter and 5,000-meter races. 

These two athletes are wildly different in many ways. (For starters, one 
competed on land and the other in water.) But most notably, they differ 
significantly in height. El Guerrouj is five feet, nine inches tall. Phelps is six 
feet, four inches tall. Despite this seven-inch difference in height, the two men 
are identical in one respect: Michael Phelps and Hicham El Guerrouj wear the 
same length inseam on their pants. 

How is this possible? Phelps has relatively short legs for his height and a very 
long torso, the perfect build for swimming. El Guerrouj has incredibly long legs 
and a short upper body, an ideal frame for distance running. 

Now, imagine if these world-class athletes were to switch sports. Given his 
remarkable athleticism, could Michael Phelps become an Olympic-caliber 
distance runner with enough training? It’s unlikely. At peak fitness, Phelps 
weighed 194 pounds, which is 40 percent heavier than El Guerrouj, who 
competed at an ultralight 138 pounds. Taller runners are heavier runners, and 
every extra pound is a curse when it comes to distance running. Against elite 
competition, Phelps would be doomed from the start. 

Similarly, El Guerrouj might be one of the best runners in history, but it’s 


doubtful he would ever qualify for the Olympics as a swimmer. Since 1976, the 
average height of Olympic gold medalists in the men’s 1,500-meter run is five 
feet, ten inches. In comparison, the average height of Olympic gold medalists in 
the men’s 100-meter freestyle swim is six feet, four inches. Swimmers tend to be 
tall and have long backs and arms, which are ideal for pulling through the water. 
El Guerrouj would be at a severe disadvantage before he ever touched the pool. 





Like Michael Phelps in the 
pool or Hicham El Guerrouj on the track, you want to play a game where the 
odds are in your favor. 






On 





the surface, your genes seem to be fixed, and it’s no fun to talk about things you 
cannot control. Plus, phrases like biological determinism makes it sound like 
certain individuals are destined for success and others doomed to failure. But 
this is a shortsighted view of the influence of genes on behavior. 






If you 
want to dunk a basketball, being seven feet tall is very useful. If you want to 
perform a gymnastics routine, being seven feet tall is a great hindrance. Our 
environment determines the suitability of our genes and the utility of our natural 
talents. When our environment changes, so do the qualities that determine 
suCCeSS. 

This is true not just for physical characteristics but for mental ones as well. 
I’m smart if you ask me about habits and human behavior; not so much when it 
comes to knitting, rocket propulsion, or guitar chords. Competence is highly 
dependent on context. 





And this is why, if you want to be truly great, 
selecting the right place to focus is crucial. 

In short: genes do not determine your destiny. They determine your areas of 
opportunity. As physician Gabor Mate notes, “Genes can predispose, but they 
don’t predetermine.” The areas where you are genetically predisposed to success 
are the areas where habits are more likely to be satisfying. The key is to direct 
your effort toward areas that both excite you and match your natural skills, to 
align your ambition with your ability. 


The obvious question is, “How do I figure out where the odds are in my 
favor? How do I identify the opportunities and habits that are right for me?” The 
first place we will look for an answer is by understanding your personality. 


HOW YOUR PERSONALITY INFLUENCES YOUR HABITS 


Your genes are operating beneath the surface of every habit. Indeed, beneath the 
surface of every behavior. Genes have been shown to influence everything from 
the number of hours you spend watching television to your likelihood to marry 
or divorce to your tendency to get addicted to drugs, alcohol, or nicotine. There’s 
a strong genetic component to how obedient or rebellious you are when facing 
authority, how vulnerable or resistant you are to stressful events, how proactive 
or reactive you tend to be, and even how captivated or bored you feel during 
sensory experiences like attending a concert. As Robert Plomin, a behavioral 
geneticist at King’s College in London, told me, “It is now at the point where we 
have stopped testing to see if traits have a genetic component because we 
literally can’t find a single one that isn’t influenced by our genes.” 

Bundled together, your unique cluster of genetic traits predispose you to a 
particular personality. Your personality is the set of characteristics that is 
consistent from situation to situation. The most proven scientific analysis of 
personality traits is known as the “Big Five,” which breaks them down into five 
spectrums of behavior. 





All five characteristics have biological underpinnings. Extroversion, for 
instance, can be tracked from birth. If scientists play a loud noise in the nursing 
ward, some babies turn toward it while others turn away. When the researchers 
tracked these children through life, they found that the babies who turned toward 


the noise were more likely to grow up to be extroverts. Those who turned away 
were more likely to become introverts. 

People who are high in agreeableness are kind, considerate, and warm. They 
also tend to have higher natural oxytocin levels, a hormone that plays an 
important role in social bonding, increases feelings of trust, and can act as a 
natural antidepressant. You can easily imagine how someone with more 
oxytocin might be inclined to build habits like writing thank-you notes or 
organizing social events. 

As a third example, consider neuroticism, which is a personality trait all 
people possess to various degrees. People who are high in neuroticism tend to be 
anxious and worry more than others. This trait has been linked to 
hypersensitivity of the amygdala, the portion of the brain responsible for 
noticing threats. In other words, people who are more sensitive to negative cues 
in their environment are more likely to score high in neuroticism. 

Our habits are not solely determined by our personalities, but there is no doubt 
that our genes nudge us in a certain direction. Our deeply rooted preferences 
make certain behaviors easier for some people than for others. You don’t have to 
apologize for these differences or feel guilty about them, but you do have to 
work with them. A person who scores lower on conscientiousness, for example, 
will be less likely to be orderly by nature and may need to rely more heavily on 
environment design to stick with good habits. (As a reminder for the less 
conscientious readers among us, environment design is a strategy we discussed 
in Chapters 6 and 12.) 

The takeaway is that you should build habits that work for your personality.* 
People can get ripped working out like a bodybuilder, but if you prefer rock 
climbing or cycling or rowing, then shape your exercise habit around your 
interests. If your friend follows a low-carb diet but you find that low-fat works 
for you, then more power to you. If you want to read more, don’t be embarrassed 
if you prefer steamy romance novels over nonfiction. Read whatever fascinates 
you.* You don’t have to build the habits everyone tells you to build. Choose the 
habit that best suits you, not the one that is most popular. 

There is a version of every habit that can bring you joy and satisfaction. Find 
it. Habits need to be enjoyable if they are going to stick. This is the core idea 
behind the 4th Law. 

Tailoring your habits to your personality is a good start, but this is not the end 
of the story. Let’s turn our attention to finding and designing situations where 
you’re at a natural advantage. 


HOW TO FIND A GAME WHERE THE ODDS ARE IN YOUR FAVOR 


Learning to play a game where the odds are in your favor is critical for 
maintaining motivation and feeling successful. In theory, you can enjoy almost 
anything. In practice, you are more likely to enjoy the things that come easily to 
you. People who are talented in a particular area tend to be more competent at 
that task and are then praised for doing a good job. They stay energized because 
they are making progress where others have failed, and because they get 
rewarded with better pay and bigger opportunities, which not only makes them 
happier but also propels them to produce even higher-quality work. It’s a 
virtuous cycle. 

Pick the right habit and progress is easy. Pick the wrong habit and life is a 
struggle. 

How do you pick the right habit? The first step is something we covered in the 
3rd Law: make it easy. In many cases, when people pick the wrong habit, it 
simply means they picked a habit that was too difficult. When a habit is easy, 
you are more likely to be successful. When you are successful, you are more 
likely to feel satisfied. However, there is another level to consider. In the long- 
run, if you continue to advance and improve, any area can become challenging. 
At some point, you need to make sure you’re playing the right game for your 
skillset. How do you figure that out? 

The most common approach is trial and error. Of course, there’s a problem 
with this strategy: life is short. You don’t have time to try every career, date 
every eligible bachelor, or play every musical instrument. Thankfully, there is an 
effective way to manage this conundrum, and it is known as the explore/exploit 
trade-off. 


‘it’s called split testing. The goal is to try out many possibilities, research a broad 
range of ideas, and cast a wide net. 


After this initial period of exploration, shift your focus to the best solution 

proper balance 

depends on whether you’re winning or losing. If you are currently winning, you 

exploit, exploit, exploit. If you are currently losing, you continue to explore, 
explore, explore. 

In the long-run it is probably most effective to work on the strategy that seems 
to deliver the best results about 80 to 90 percent of the time and keep exploring 
with the remaining 10 to 20 percent. Google famously asks employees to spend 
80 percent of the workweek on their official job and 20 percent on projects of 


their choice, which has led to the creation of blockbuster products like AdWords 
and Gmail. 

The optimal approach also depends on how much time you have. If you have 
a lot of time—like someone at the beginning of their career—it makes more 
sense to explore because once you find the right thing, you still have a good 
amount of time to exploit it. If you’re pressed for time—say, as you come up on 
the deadline for a project—you should implement the best solution you’ve found 
so far and get some results. 

As you explore different options, there are a series of questions you can ask 
yourself to continually narrow in on the habits and areas that will be most 
satisfying to you: 


What feels like fun to me, but work to others? The mark of whether you 
are made for a task is not whether you love it but whether you can handle 
the pain of the task easier than most people. When are you enjoying 
yourself while other people are complaining? The work that hurts you less 
than it hurts others is the work you were made to do. 


What makes me lose track of time? Flow is the mental state you enter 
when you are so focused on the task at hand that the rest of the world fades 
away. This blend of happiness and peak performance is what athletes and 
performers experience when they are “in the zone.” It is nearly impossible 
to experience a flow state and not find the task satisfying at least to some 
degree. 


Where do I get greater returns than the average person? We are 
continually comparing ourselves to those around us, and a behavior is more 
likely to be satisfying when the comparison is in our favor. When I started 
writing at jamesclear.com, my email list grew very quickly. I wasn’t quite 
sure what I was doing well, but I knew that results seemed to be coming 
faster for me than for some of my colleagues, which motivated me to keep 
writing. 


What comes naturally to me? For just a moment, ignore what you have 
been taught. Ignore what society has told you. Ignore what others expect of 
you. Look inside yourself and ask, “What feels natural to me? When have I 


felt alive? When have I felt like the real me?” No internal judgments or 
people-pleasing. No second-guessing or self-criticism. Just feelings of 
engagement and enjoyment. Whenever you feel authentic and genuine, you 
are headed in the right direction. 


To be honest, some of this process is just luck. Michael Phelps and Hicham El 
Guerrouj were lucky to be born with a rare set of abilities that are highly valued 
by society and to be placed in the ideal environment for those abilities. We all 
have limited time on this planet, and the truly great among us are the ones who 
not only work hard but also have the good fortune to be exposed to opportunities 
that favor us. 

But what if you don’t want to leave it up to luck? 

If you can’t find a game where the odds are stacked in your favor, create one. 
Scott Adams, the cartoonist behind Dilbert, says, “Everyone has at least a few 
areas in which they could be in the top 25% with some effort. In my case, I can 
draw better than most people, but I’m hardly an artist. And I’m not any funnier 
than the average standup comedian who never makes it big, but I’m funnier than 
most people. The magic is that few people can draw well and write jokes. It’s the 
combination of the two that makes what I do so rare. And when you add in my 
business background, suddenly I had a topic that few cartoonists could hope to 
understand without living it.” 

When you can’t win by being better, you can win by being different. By 
combining your skills, you reduce the level of competition, which makes it 
easier to stand out. You can shortcut the need for a genetic advantage (or for 
years of practice) by rewriting the rules. A good player works hard to win the 
game everyone else is playing. A great player creates a new game that favors 
their strengths and avoids their weaknesses. 

In college, I designed my own major, biomechanics, which was a combination 
of physics, chemistry, biology, and anatomy. I wasn’t smart enough to stand out 
among the top physics or biology majors, so I created my own game. And 
because it suited me—I was only taking the courses I was interested in— 
studying felt like less of a chore. It was also easier to avoid the trap of 
comparing myself to everyone else. After all, nobody else was taking the same 
combination of classes, so who could say if they were better or worse? 


with you. Many bodybuilders are stronger than the average arm wrestler, but 
even a massive bodybuilder may lose at arm wrestling because the arm wrestling 


champ has very specific strength. Even if you’re not the most naturally gifted, 
you can often win by being the best in a very narrow category. 

Boiling water will soften a potato but harden an egg. You can’t control 
whether you’re a potato or an egg, but you can decide to play a game where it’s 
better to be hard or soft. If you can find a more favorable environment, you can 
transform the situation from one where the odds are against you to one where 
they are in your favor. 


HOW TO GET THE MOST OUT OF YOUR GENES 


Our genes do not eliminate the need for hard work. They clarify it. They tell us 
what to work hard on. Once we realize our strengths, we know where to spend 
our time and energy. We know which types of opportunities to look for and 
which types of challenges to avoid. The better we understand our nature, the 
better our strategy can be. 

Biological differences matter. Even so, it’s more productive to focus on 
whether you are fulfilling your own potential than comparing yourself to 
someone else. The fact that you have a natural limit to any specific ability has 
nothing to do with whether you are reaching the ceiling of your capabilities. 
People get so caught up in the fact that they have limits that they rarely exert the 
effort required to get close to them. 

Furthermore, genes can’t make you successful if you’re not doing the work. 
Yes, it’s possible that the ripped trainer at the gym has better genes, but if you 
haven’t put in the same reps, it’s impossible to say if you have been dealt a 
better or worse genetic hand. Until you work as hard as those you admire, don’t 
explain away their success as luck. 





Chapter Summary 





19 


The Goldilocks Rule: How to Stay Motivated in 
Life and Work 


I, ss, Disneyland had just opened in Anaheim, California, when a ten-year-old 


boy walked in and asked for a job. Labor laws were loose back then and the boy 
managed to land a position selling guidebooks for $0.50 apiece. 

Within a year, he had transitioned to Disney’s magic shop, where he learned 
tricks from the older employees. He experimented with jokes and tried out 
simple routines on visitors. Soon he discovered that what he loved was not 
performing magic but performing in general. He set his sights on becoming a 
comedian. 

Beginning in his teenage years, he started performing in little clubs around 
Los Angeles. The crowds were small and his act was short. He was rarely on 
stage for more than five minutes. Most of the people in the crowd were too busy 
drinking or talking with friends to pay attention. One night, he literally delivered 
his standup routine to an empty club. 

It wasn’t glamorous work, but there was no doubt he was getting better. His 
first routines would only last one or two minutes. By high school, his material 
had expanded to include a five-minute act and, a few years later, a ten-minute 
show. At nineteen, he was performing weekly for twenty minutes at a time. He 
had to read three poems during the show just to make the routine long enough, 
but his skills continued to progress. 

He spent another decade experimenting, adjusting, and practicing. He took a 
job as a television writer and, gradually, he was able to land his own appearances 
on talk shows. By the mid-1970s, he had worked his way into being a regular 
guest on The Tonight Show and Saturday Night Live. 

Finally, after nearly fifteen years of work, the young man rose to fame. He 
toured sixty cities in sixty-three days. Then seventy-two cities in eighty days. 
Then eighty-five cities in ninety days. He had 18,695 people attend one show in 


Ohio. Another 45,000 tickets were sold for his three-day show in New York. He 
catapulted to the top of his genre and became one of the most successful 
comedians of his time. 

His name is Steve Martin. 

Martin’s story offers a fascinating perspective on what it takes to stick with 
habits for the long run. Comedy is not for the timid. It is hard to imagine a 
situation that would strike fear into the hearts of more people than performing 
alone on stage and failing to get a single laugh. And yet Steve Martin faced this 
fear every week for eighteen years. In his words, “10 years spent learning, 4 
years spent refining, and 4 years as a wild success.” 

Why is it that some people, like Martin, stick with their habits—whether 
practicing jokes or drawing cartoons or playing guitar—while most of us 
struggle to stay motivated? How do we design habits that pull us in rather than 
ones that fade away? Scientists have been studying this question for many years. 
While there is still much to learn, one of the most consistent findings is that the 













difficulty. If you love tennis and try to play a serious match against a four-year- 
old, you will quickly become bored. It’s too easy. You’ll win every point. In 
contrast, if you play a professional tennis player like Roger Federer or Serena 
Williams, you will quickly lose motivation because the match is too difficult. 

Now consider playing tennis against someone who is your equal. As the game 
progresses, you win a few points and you lose a few. You have a good chance of 
winning, but only if you really try. Your focus narrows, distractions fade away, 
and you find yourself fully invested in the task at hand. This is a challenge of 
just manageable difficulty and it is a prime example of the Goldilocks Rule. 

The Goldilocks Rule states that humans experience peak motivation when 
working on tasks that are right on the edge of their current abilities. Not too 
hard. Not too easy. Just right. 


THE GOLDILOCKS RULE 


GOLDILOCKS 
ZONE 


MOTIVATION 









i ; 


BOREDOM FAILURE 


DIFFICULTY ——$——_»-__» 


FIGURE 15: Maximum motivation occurs when facing a challenge of just manageable difficulty. In psychology research this is known as the Yerkes—Dodson law, which describes the 
optimal level of arousal as the midpoint between boredom and anxiety. 


Martin’s comedy career is an excellent example of the Goldilocks Rule in 
practice. Each year, he expanded his comedy routine—but only by a minute or 
two. He was always adding new material, but he also kept a few jokes that were 
guaranteed to get laughs. There were just enough victories to keep him 
motivated and just enough mistakes to keep him working hard. 






This is 
an idea we covered in detail while discussing the 3rd Law of Behavior Change. 





They found that to achieve 
a state of flow, a task must be roughly 4 percent beyond your current ability. In 
real life it’s typically not feasible to quantify the difficulty of an action in this 


way, but the core idea of the Goldilocks Rule remains: working on challenges of 
just manageable difficulty—something on the perimeter of your ability—seems 
crucial for maintaining motivation. 

Improvement requires a delicate balance. You need to regularly search for 
challenges that push you to your edge while continuing to make enough progress 
to stay motivated. Behaviors need to remain novel in order for them to stay 
attractive and satisfying. Without variety, we get bored. And boredom is perhaps 
the greatest villain on the quest for selfimprovement. 


HOW TO STAY FOCUSED WHEN YOU GET BORED WORKING ON 
YOUR GOALS 


After my baseball career ended, I was looking for a new sport. I joined a 
weightlifting team and one day an elite coach visited our gym. He had worked 
with thousands of athletes during his long career, including a few Olympians. I 
introduced myself and we began talking about the process of improvement. 

“What’s the difference between the best athletes and everyone else?” I asked. 
“What do the really successful people do that most don’t?” 

He mentioned the factors you might expect: genetics, luck, talent. But then he 
said something I wasn’t expecting: “At some point it comes down to who can 
handle the boredom of training every day, doing the same lifts over and over and 
over.” 

His answer surprised me because it’s a different way of thinking about work 
ethic. People talk about getting “amped up” to work on their goals. Whether it’s 
business or sports or art, you hear people say things like, “It all comes down to 
passion.” Or, “You have to really want it.” As a result, many of us get depressed 
when we lose focus or motivation because we think that successful people have 
some bottomless reserve of passion. But this coach was saying that really 





Mastery requires practice. But the more you practice something, the more 
boring and routine it becomes. Once the beginner gains have been made and we 
learn what to expect, our interest starts to fade. Sometimes it happens even faster 
than that. All you have to do is hit the gym a few days in a row or publish a 
couple of blog posts on time and letting one day slip doesn’t feel like much. 
Things are going well. It’s easy to rationalize taking a day off because you’re in 
a good place. 


The greatest threat to success is not failure but boredom. We get bored with 
habits because they stop delighting us. The outcome becomes expected. And as 
our habits become ordinary, we start derailing our progress to seek novelty. 
Perhaps this is why we get caught up in a never-ending cycle, jumping from one 
workout to the next, one diet to the next, one business idea to the next. As soon 
as we experience the slightest dip in motivation, we begin seeking a new strategy 
—even if the old one was still working. As Machiavelli noted, “Men desire 
novelty to such an extent that those who are doing well wish for a change as 
much as those who are doing badly.” 

Perhaps this is why many of the most habit-forming products are those that 
provide continuous forms of novelty. Video games provide visual novelty. Porn 
provides sexual novelty. Junk foods provide culinary novelty. Each of these 
experiences offer continual elements of surprise. 

In psychology, this is known as a variable reward.* Slot machines are the 
most common real-world example. A gambler hits the jackpot every now and 
then but not at any predictable interval. The pace of rewards varies. This 
variance leads to the greatest spike of dopamine, enhances memory recall, and 
accelerates habit formation. 

Variable rewards won’t create a craving—that is, you can’t take a reward 
people are uninterested in, give it to them at a variable interval, and hope it will 
change their mind—but they are a powerful way to amplify the cravings we 
already experience because they reduce boredom. 

The sweet spot of desire occurs at a 50/50 split between success and failure. 
Half of the time you get what you want. Half of the time you don’t. You need 
just enough “winning” to experience satisfaction and just enough “wanting” to 
experience desire. This is one of the benefits of following the Goldilocks Rule. If 
you’re already interested in a habit, working on challenges of just manageable 
difficulty is a good way to keep things interesting. 

Of course, not all habits have a variable reward component, and you wouldn’t 
want them to. If Google only delivered a useful search result some of the time, I 
would switch to a competitor pretty quickly. If Uber only picked up half of my 
trips, I doubt I’d be using that service much longer. And if I flossed my teeth 
each night and only sometimes ended up with a clean mouth, I think I’d skip it. 





We all have goals that we would like to achieve and dreams that we would 
like to fulfill, but it doesn’t matter what you are trying to become better at, if you 
only do the work when it’s convenient or exciting, then you’ll never be 


consistent enough to achieve remarkable results. 


David Cain, an author and meditation teacher, encourages his students to 
avoid being “fair-weather meditators.” Similarly, you don’t want to be a fair- 
weather athlete or a fair-weather writer or a fair-weather anything. When a habit 
is truly important to you, you have to be willing to stick to it in any mood. 
Professionals take action even when the mood isn’t right. They might not enjoy 
it, but they find a way to put the reps in. 

There have been a lot of sets that I haven’t felt like finishing, but I’ve never 
regretted doing the workout. There have been a lot of articles I haven’t felt like 
writing, but I’ve never regretted publishing on schedule. There have been a lot of 
days I’ve felt like relaxing, but I’ve never regretted showing up and working on 
something that was important to me. 

The only way to become excellent is to be endlessly fascinated by doing the 
same thing over and over. You have to fall in love with boredom. 


Chapter Summary 


20 
The Downside of Creating Good Habits 


H.. CREATE THE FOUNDATION FOR MASTERY. [N chess, it is only after the basic movements of the 


pieces have become automatic that a player can focus on the next level of the 
game. Each chunk of information that is memorized opens up the mental space 
for more effortful thinking. This is true for any endeavor. When you know the 
simple movements so well that you can perform them without thinking, you are 
free to pay attention to more advanced details. In this way, habits are the 
backbone of any pursuit of excellence. 


However, the 










But then, as a habit becomes automatic, you 
become less sensitive to feedback. You fall into mindless repetition. It becomes 
easier to let mistakes slide. When you can do it “good enough” on autopilot, you 
stop thinking about how to do it better. 


The upside of habits is that we can do things without thinking. The downside 
attention to little errors. You assume you’re getting better because you’re 


gaining experience. In reality, you are merely reinforcing your current habits— 
not improving them. In fact, some research has shown that once a skill has been 
mastered there is usually a slight decline in performance over time. 

Usually, this minor dip in performance is no cause for worry. You don’t need 
a system to continuously improve how well you brush your teeth or tie your 
shoes or make your morning cup of tea. With habits like these, good enough is 
usually good enough. The less energy you spend on trivial choices, the more you 
can spend it on what really matters. 

However, when you want to maximize your potential and achieve elite levels 
of performance, you need a more nuanced approach. You can’t repeat the same 
things blindly and expect to become exceptional. Habits are necessary, but not 
sufficient for mastery. What you need is a combination of automatic habits and 








deliberate practice. 


To become great, certain skills do need to become automatic. Basketball 
players need to be able to dribble without thinking before they can move on to 
mastering layups with their nondominant hand. Surgeons need to repeat the first 
incision so many times that they could do it with their eyes closed, so that they 
can focus on the hundreds of variables that arise during surgery. But after one 
habit has been mastered, you have to return to the effortful part of the work and 
begin building the next habit. 

Mastery is the process of narrowing your focus to a tiny element of success, 
repeating it until you have internalized the skill, and then using this new habit as 
the foundation to advance to the next frontier of your development. Old tasks 
become easier the second time around, but it doesn’t get easier overall because 
now you’re pouring your energy into the next challenge. Each habit unlocks the 
next level of performance. It’s an endless cycle. 


MASTERING ONE HABIT 


AUTOMATICITY 





REPETITONS 


MASTERING A FIELD 


SKILL 





REPETITONS 


FIGURE 16: The process of mastery requires that you progressively layer improvements on top of one another, each habit building upon the last until a new level of performance has been 
reached and a higher range of skills has been internalized. 


Although habits are powerful, what you need is a way to remain conscious of 
your performance over time, so you can continue to refine and improve. It is 
precisely at the moment when you begin to feel like you have mastered a skill— 
right when things are starting to feel automatic and you are becoming 
comfortable—that you must avoid slipping into the trap of complacency. 

The solution? Establish a system for reflection and review. 


HOW TO REVIEW YOUR HABITS AND MAKE ADJUSTMENTS 


In 1986, the Los Angeles Lakers had one of the most talented basketball teams 
ever assembled, but they are rarely remembered that way. The team started the 
1985-1986 NBA season with an astounding 29-5 record. “The pundits were 
saying that we might be the best team in the history of basketball,” head coach 
Pat Riley said after the season. Surprisingly, the Lakers stumbled in the 1986 
playoffs and suffered a season-ending defeat in the Western Conference Finals. 
The “best team in the history of basketball” didn’t even play for the NBA 
championship. 

After that blow, Riley was tired of hearing about how much talent his players 
had and about how much promise his team held. He didn’t want to see flashes of 
brilliance followed by a gradual fade in performance. He wanted the Lakers to 


play up to their potential, night after night. In the summer of 1986, he created a 
plan to do exactly that, a system that he called the Career Best Effort program or 
CBE. 

“When players first join the Lakers,’ Riley explained, “we track their 
basketball statistics all the way back to high school. I call this Taking Their 
Number. We look for an accurate gauge of what a player can do, then build him 
into our plan for the team, based on the notion that he will maintain and then 
improve upon his averages.” 

After determining a player’s baseline level of performance, Riley added a key 
step. He asked each player to “improve their output by at least 1 percent over the 
course of the season. If they succeeded, it would be a CBE, or Career Best 
Effort.” Similar to the British Cycling team that we discussed in Chapter 1, the 
Lakers sought peak performance by getting slightly better each day. 

Riley was careful to point out that CBE was not merely about points or 
Statistics but about giving your “best effort spiritually and mentally and 
physically.” Players got credit for “allowing an opponent to run into you when 
you know that a foul will be called against him, diving for loose balls, going 
after rebounds whether you are likely to get them or not, helping a teammate 
when the player he’s guarding has surged past him, and other ‘unsung hero’ 
deeds.” 

As an example, let’s say that Magic Johnson—the Lakers star player at the 
time—had 11 points, 8 rebounds, 12 assists, 2 steals, and 5 turnovers in a game. 
Magic also got credit for an “unsung hero” deed by diving after a loose ball (+1). 
Finally, he played a total of 33 minutes in this imaginary game. 

The positive numbers (11 + 8 + 12 + 2 + 1) add up to 34. Then, we subtract 
the 5 turnovers (34—5) to get 29. Finally, we divide 29 by 33 minutes played. 


29/33 = 0.879 


Magic’s CBE number here would be 879. This number was calculated for all 
of a player’s games, and it was the average CBE that a player was asked to 
improve by 1 percent over the season. Riley compared each player’s current 
CBE to not only their past performances but also those of other players in the 
league. As Riley put it, “We rank team members alongside league opponents 
who play the same position and have similar role definitions.” 

Sportswriter Jackie MacMullan noted, “Riley trumpeted the top performers in 
the league in bold lettering on the blackboard each week and measured them 


against the corresponding players on his own roster. Solid, reliable players 
generally rated a score in the 600s, while elite players scored at least 800. Magic 
Johnson, who submitted 138 triple-doubles in his career, often scored over 
1,000.” 

The Lakers also emphasized year-over-year progress by making historical 
comparisons of CBE data. Riley said, “We stacked the month of November 
1986, next to November 1985, and showed the players whether they were doing 
better or worse than at the same point last season. Then we showed them how 
their performance figures for December 1986, stacked up against November’s.” 

The Lakers rolled out CBE in October 1986. Eight months later, they were 
NBA champions. The following year, Pat Riley led his team to another title as 
the Lakers became the first team in twenty years to win back-to-back NBA 


championships. Afterward, he said, “Sustaining an effort is the most important 
thing for any enterprise. The way to be successful is to learn how to do things 
Tight, then do them the same way every time.” 

The CBE program is a prime example of the power of reflection and review. 
The Lakers were already talented. CBE helped them get the most out of what 
they had, and made sure their habits improved rather than declined. 

Reflection and review enables the long-term improvement of all habits 
because it makes you aware of your mistakes and helps you consider possible 
paths for improvement. Without reflection, we can make excuses, create 
rationalizations, and lie to ourselves. We have no process for determining 
whether we are performing better or worse compared to yesterday. 

Top performers in all fields engage in various types of reflection and review, 
and the process doesn’t have to be complex. Kenyan runner Eliud Kipchoge is 
one of the greatest marathoners of all time and an Olympic gold medalist. He 
still takes notes after every practice in which he reviews his training for the day 
and searches for areas that can be improved. Similarly, gold medal swimmer 
Katie Ledecky records her wellness on a scale of 1 to 10 and includes notes on 
her nutrition and how well she slept. She also records the times posted by other 
swimmers. At the end of each week, her coach goes over her notes and adds his 
thoughts. 

It’s not just athletes, either. When comedian Chris Rock is preparing fresh 
material, he will first appear at small nightclubs dozens of times and test 
hundreds of jokes. He brings a notepad on stage and records which bits go over 
well and where he needs to make adjustments. The few killer lines that survive 
will form the backbone of his new show. 

I know of executives and investors who keep a “decision journal” in which 
they record the major decisions they make each week, why they made them, and 









what they expect the outcome to be. They review their choices at the end of each 
month or year to see where they were correct and where they went wrong.* 

Improvement is not just about learning habits, it’s also about fine-tuning them. 
Reflection and review ensures that you spend your time on the right things and 
make course corrections whenever necessary—like Pat Riley adjusting the effort 
of his players on a nightly basis. You don’t want to keep practicing a habit if it 
becomes ineffective. 

Personally, I employ two primary modes of reflection and review. Each 
December, I perform an Annual Review, in which I reflect on the previous year. I 
tally my habits for the year by counting up how many articles I published, how 
many workouts I put in, how many new places I visited, and more.* Then, I 
reflect on my progress (or lack thereof) by answering three questions: 


1. What went well this year? 
2. What didn’t go so well this year? 
3. What did I learn? 


Six months later, when summer rolls around, I conduct an Integrity Report. 
Like everyone, I make a lot of mistakes. My Integrity Report helps me realize 
where I went wrong and motivates me to get back on course. I use it as a time to 
revisit my core values and consider whether I have been living in accordance 
with them. This is when I reflect on my identity and how I can work toward 
being the type of person I wish to become.* 

My yearly Integrity Report answers three questions: 


1. What are the core values that drive my life and work? 
2. How am I living and working with integrity right now? 
3. How can I set a higher standard in the future? 


These two reports don’t take very long—just a few hours per year—but they 
are crucial periods of refinement. They prevent the gradual slide that happens 
when I don’t pay close attention. They provide an annual reminder to revisit my 
desired identity and consider how my habits are helping me become the type of 
person I wish to be. They indicate when I should upgrade my habits and take on 
new challenges and when I should dial my efforts back and focus on the 
fundamentals. 


Reflection can also bring a sense of perspective. Daily habits are powerful 
because of how they compound, but worrying too much about every daily choice 
is like looking at yourself in the mirror from an inch away. You can see every 
imperfection and lose sight of the bigger picture. There is too much feedback. 
Conversely, never reviewing your habits is like never looking in the mirror. You 
aren’t aware of easily fixable flaws—a spot on your shirt, a bit of food in your 
teeth. There is too little feedback. Periodic reflection and review is like viewing 
yourself in the mirror from a conversational distance. You can see the important 
changes you should make without losing sight of the bigger picture. You want to 
view the entire mountain range, not obsess over each peak and valley. 

Finally, reflection and review offers an ideal time to revisit one of the most 
important aspects of behavior change: identity. 


HOW TO BREAK THE BELIEFS THAT HOLD YOU BACK 


In the beginning, repeating a habit is essential to build up evidence of your 
desired identity. As you latch on to that new identity, however, those same 
beliefs can hold you back from the next level of growth. When working against 
you, your identity creates a kind of “pride” that encourages you to deny your 
weak spots and prevents you from truly growing. This is one of the greatest 
downsides of building habits. 

The more sacred an idea is to us—that is, the more deeply it is tied to our 
identity—the more strongly we will defend it against criticism. You see this in 
every industry. The schoolteacher who ignores innovative teaching methods and 
sticks with her tried-and-true lesson plans. The veteran manager who is 
committed to doing things “his way.” The surgeon who dismisses the ideas of 
her younger colleagues. The band who produces a mind-blowing first album and 
then gets stuck in a rut. The tighter we cling to an identity, the harder it becomes 
to grow beyond it. 

One solution is to avoid making any single aspect of your identity an 
overwhelming portion of who you are. In the words of investor Paul Graham, 
“keep your identity small.” The more you let a single belief define you, the less 
capable you are of adapting when life challenges you. If you tie everything up in 
being the point guard or the partner at the firm or whatever else, then the loss of 
that facet of your life will wreck you. If you’re a vegan and then develop a 
health condition that forces you to change your diet, you’|l have an identity crisis 
on your hands. When you cling too tightly to one identity, you become brittle. 
Lose that one thing and you lose yourself. 


For most of my young life, being an athlete was a major part of my identity. 
After my baseball career ended, I struggled to find myself. When you spend your 
whole life defining yourself in one way and that disappears, who are you now? 

Military veterans and former entrepreneurs report similar feelings. If your 
identity is wrapped up in a belief like “I’m a great soldier,” what happens when 
your period of service ends? For many business owners, their identity is 
something along the lines of “I’m the CEO” or “I’m the founder.” If you have 
spent every waking moment working on your business, how will you feel after 
you sell the company? 

The key to mitigating these losses of identity is to redefine yourself such that 
you get to keep important aspects of your identity even if your particular role 
changes. 


° “Pm an athlete” becomes “I’m the type of person who is mentally 
tough and loves a physical challenge.” 

° “Pm a great soldier” transforms into “I’m the type of person who is 
disciplined, reliable, and great on a team.” 

° “Pm the CEO” translates to “I’m the type of person who builds and 


creates things.” 


When chosen effectively, an identity can be flexible rather than brittle. Like 
water flowing around an obstacle, your identity works with the changing 
circumstances rather than against them. 

The following quote from the Tao Te Ching encapsulates the ideas perfectly: 


Men are born soft and supple; 
dead, they are stiff and hard. 
Plants are born tender and pliant; 
dead, they are brittle and dry. 
Thus whoever is stiff and inflexible 
is a disciple of death. 
Whoever is soft and yielding 
is a disciple of life. 

The hard and stiff will be broken. 
The soft and supple will prevail. 


—L AO Tz 


Habits deliver numerous benefits, but the downside is that they can lock us 
into our previous patterns of thinking and acting—even when the world is 
shifting around us. Everything is impermanent. Life is constantly changing, so 
you need to periodically check in to see if your old habits and beliefs are still 
serving you. 


Chapter Summary 





Conclusion 


The Secret to Results That Last 


Te isavancient Greek parable known as the Sorites Paradox,* which talks about 


the effect one small action can have when repeated enough times. One 
formulation of the paradox goes as follows: Can one coin make a person rich? If 
you give a person a pile of ten coins, you wouldn’t claim that he or she is rich. 
But what if you add another? And another? And another? At some point, you 
will have to admit that no one can be rich unless one coin can make him or her 
SO. 

We can say the same about atomic habits. Can one tiny change transform your 
life? It’s unlikely you would say so. But what if you made another? And 
another? And another? At some point, you will have to admit that your life was 
transformed by one small change. 

The holy grail of habit change is not a single 1 percent improvement, but a 
thousand of them. Its a bunch of atomic habits stacking up, each one a 
fundamental unit of the overall system. 

In the beginning, small improvements can often seem meaningless because 
they get washed away by the weight of the system. Just as one coin won’t make 
you rich, one positive change like meditating for one minute or reading one page 
each day is unlikely to deliver a noticeable difference. 

Gradually, though, as you continue to layer small changes on top of one 
another, the scales of life start to move. Each improvement is like adding a grain 
of sand to the positive side of the scale, slowly tilting things in your favor. 
Eventually, if you stick with it, you hit a tipping point. Suddenly, it feels easier 
to stick with good habits. The weight of the system is working for you rather 
than against you. 

Over the course of this book, we’ve looked at dozens of stories about top 
performers. We’ve heard about Olympic gold medalists, award-winning artists, 
business leaders, lifesaving physicians, and star comedians who have all used the 
science of small habits to master their craft and vault to the top of their field. 
Each of the people, teams, and companies we have covered has faced different 
circumstances, but ultimately progressed in the same way: through a 
commitment to tiny, sustainable, unrelenting improvements. 


Success is not a goal to reach or a finish line to cross. It is a system to 
improve, an endless process to refine. In Chapter 1, I said, “If you’re having 
trouble changing your habits, the problem isn’t you. The problem is your system. 
Bad habits repeat themselves again and again not because you don’t want to 
change, but because you have the wrong system for change.” 

As this book draws to a close, I hope the opposite is true. With the Four Laws 
of Behavior Change, you have a set of tools and strategies that you can use to 
build better systems and shape better habits. Sometimes a habit will be hard to 
remember and you’ll need to make it obvious. Other times you won’t feel like 
starting and you’ll need to make it attractive. In many cases, you may find that a 
habit will be too difficult and you’ll need to make it easy. And sometimes, you 
won’t feel like sticking with it and you’ ll need to make it satisfying. 


Behaviors are effortless here. Behaviors are difficult here. 


Obvious Invisible 


Attractive Unattractive 


Easy Hard 


Satisfying Unsatisfying 


You want to push your good habits toward the left side of the spectrum by making them obvious, attractive, easy, and satisfying. Meanwhile, you want to cluster your bad habits toward the 
right side by making them invisible, unattractive, hard, and unsatisfying. 


This is a continuous process. There is no finish line. There is no permanent 
solution. Whenever you’re looking to improve, you can rotate through the Four 
Laws of Behavior Change until you find the next bottleneck. Make it obvious. 
Make it attractive. Make it easy. Make it satisfying. Round and round. Always 
looking for the next way to get 1 percent better. 

The secret to getting results that last is to never stop making improvements. 
It’s remarkable what you can build if you just don’t stop. It’s remarkable the 
business you can build if you don’t stop working. It’s remarkable the body you 
can build if you don’t stop training. It’s remarkable the knowledge you can build 
if you don’t stop learning. It’s remarkable the fortune you can build if you don’t 
stop saving. It’s remarkable the friendships you can build if you don’t stop 
caring. Small habits don’t add up. They compound. 

That’s the power of atomic habits. Tiny changes. Remarkable results. 


Appendix 


What Should You Read Next? 


Taw vou so Much for taking the time to read this book. It has been a pleasure 


sharing my work with you. If you are looking for something to read next, allow 
me to offer a suggestion. 

If you enjoyed Atomic Habits, then you may like my other writing as well. My 
latest articles are sent out in my free weekly newsletter. Subscribers are also the 
first to hear about my newest books and projects. Finally, in addition to my own 
work, each year I send out a reading list of my favorite books from other authors 
on a wide range of subjects. 

You can sign up at: 


jamesclear.com/newsletter 


Little Lessons from the Four Laws 


I. mis soox, | have introduced a four-step model for human behavior: cue, craving, 


response, reward. This framework not only teaches us how to create new habits 
but also reveals some interesting insights about human behavior. 


Problem phase 


1. Cue 
2. Craving 


Solution phase 


3. Response 
4. Reward 


In this section, I have compiled some lessons (and a few bits of common 
sense) that are confirmed by the model. The purpose of these examples is to 
clarify just how useful and wide-ranging this framework is when describing 
human behavior. Once you understand the model, you’ll see examples of it 
everywhere. 

Awareness comes before desire. A craving is created when you assign 
meaning to a cue. Your brain constructs an emotion or feeling to describe your 
current situation, and that means a craving can only occur after you have noticed 
an opportunity. 

Happiness is simply the absence of desire. When you observe a cue, but do 
not desire to change your state, you are content with the current situation. 
Happiness is not about the achievement of pleasure (which is joy or satisfaction), 
but about the lack of desire. It arrives when you have no urge to feel differently. 
Happiness is the state you enter when you no longer want to change your state. 

However, happiness is fleeting because a new desire always comes along. As 
Caed Budris says, “Happiness is the space between one desire being fulfilled and 
a new desire forming.” Likewise, suffering is the space between craving a 
change in state and getting it. 

It is the idea of pleasure that we chase. We seek the image of pleasure that 
we generate in our minds. At the time of action, we do not know what it will be 


like to attain that image (or even if it will satisfy us). The feeling of satisfaction 
only comes afterward. This is what the Austrian neurologist Victor Frankl meant 
when he said that happiness cannot be pursued, it must ensue. Desire is pursued. 
Pleasure ensues from action. 

Peace occurs when you don’t turn your observations into problems. The 
first step in any behavior is observation. You notice a cue, a bit of information, 
an event. If you do not desire to act on what you observe, then you are at peace. 

Craving is about wanting to fix everything. Observation without craving is the 
realization that you do not need to fix anything. Your desires are not running 
rampant. You do not crave a change in state. Your mind does not generate a 
problem for you to solve. You’re simply observing and existing. 

With a big enough why you can overcome any how. Friedrich Nietzsche, 
the German philosopher and poet, famously wrote, “He who has a why to live 
for can bear almost any how.” This phrase harbors an important truth about 
human behavior. If your motivation and desire are great enough (that is, why are 
you are acting), you’ll take action even when it is quite difficult. Great craving 
can power great action—even when friction is high. 

Being curious is better than being smart. Being motivated and curious 
counts for more than being smart because it leads to action. Being smart will 
never deliver results on its own because it doesn’t get you to act. It is desire, not 
intelligence, that prompts behavior. As Naval Ravikant says, “The trick to doing 
anything is first cultivating a desire for it.” 

Emotions drive behavior. Every decision is an emotional decision at some 
level. Whatever your logical reasons are for taking action, you only feel 
compelled to act on them because of emotion. In fact, people with damage to 
emotional centers of the brain can list many reasons for taking action but still 
will not act because they do not have emotions to drive them. This is why 
craving comes before response. The feeling comes first, and then the behavior. 

We can only be rational and logical after we have been emotional. The 
primary mode of the brain is to feel; the secondary mode is to think. Our first 
response—the fast, nonconscious portion of the brain—is optimized for feeling 
and anticipating. Our second response—the slow, conscious portion of the brain 
—is the part that does the “thinking.” 

Psychologists refer to this as System 1 (feelings and rapid judgments) versus 
System 2 (rational analysis). The feeling comes first (System 1); the rationality 
only intervenes later (System 2). This works great when the two are aligned, but 
it results in illogical and emotional thinking when they are not. 

Your response tends to follow your emotions. Our thoughts and actions are 
rooted in what we find attractive, not necessarily in what is logical. Two people 


can notice the same set of facts and respond very differently because they run 
those facts through their unique emotional filter. This is one reason why 
appealing to emotion is typically more powerful than appealing to reason. If a 
topic makes someone feel emotional, they will rarely be interested in the data. 
This is why emotions can be such a threat to wise decision making. 

Put another way: most people believe that the reasonable response is the one 
that benefits them: the one that satisfies their desires. To approach a situation 
from a more neutral emotional position allows you to base your response on the 
data rather than the emotion. 

Suffering drives progress. The source of all suffering is the desire for a 
change in state. This is also the source of all progress. The desire to change your 
state is what powers you to take action. It is wanting more that pushes humanity 
to seek improvements, develop new technologies, and reach for a higher level. 
With craving, we are dissatisfied but driven. Without craving, we are satisfied 
but lack ambition. 

Your actions reveal how badly you want something. If you keep saying 
something is a priority but you never act on it, then you don’t really want it. It’s 
time to have an honest conversation with yourself. Your actions reveal your true 
motivations. 

Reward is on the other side of sacrifice. Response (sacrifice of energy) 
always precedes reward (the collection of resources). The “runner’s high” only 
comes after the hard run. The reward only comes after the energy is spent. 

Self-control is difficult because it is not satisfying. A reward is an outcome 
that satisfies your craving. This makes self-control ineffective because inhibiting 
our desires does not usually resolve them. Resisting temptation does not satisfy 
your craving; it just ignores it. It creates space for the craving to pass. Self- 
control requires you to release a desire rather than satisfy it. 

Our expectations determine our satisfaction. The gap between our cravings 
and our rewards determines how satisfied we feel after taking action. If the 
mismatch between expectations and outcomes is positive (surprise and delight), 
then we are more likely to repeat a behavior in the future. If the mismatch is 
negative (disappointment and frustration), then we are less likely to do so. 

For example, if you expect to get $10 and get $100, you feel great. If you 
expect to get $100 and get $10, you feel disappointed. Your expectation changes 
your satisfaction. An average experience preceded by high expectations is a 
disappointment. An average experience preceded by low expectations is a 
delight. When liking and wanting are approximately the same, you feel satisfied. 


OV ne? i ee Ss Ss TD Sate E S i 2a an 


DausIacuon = LIKINS — waning 


This is the wisdom behind Seneca’s famous quote, “Being poor is not having 
too little, it is wanting more.” If your wants outpace your likes, you’ll always be 
unsatisfied. You’re perpetually putting more weight on the problem than the 
solution. 

Happiness is relative. When I first began sharing my writing publicly it took 
me three months to get one thousand subscribers. When I hit that milestone, I 
told my parents and my girlfriend. We celebrated. I felt excited and motivated. A 
few years later, I realized that one thousand people were signing up each day. 
And yet I didn’t even think to tell anyone. It felt normal. I was getting results 
ninety times faster than before but experiencing little pleasure over it. It wasn’t 
until a few days later that I realized how absurd it was that I wasn’t celebrating 
something that would have seemed like a pipe dream just a few years before. 

The pain of failure correlates to the height of expectation. When desire is 
high, it hurts to not like the outcome. Failing to attain something you want hurts 
more than failing to attain something you didn’t think much about in the first 
place. This is why people say, “I don’t want to get my hopes up.” 

Feelings come both before and after the behavior. Before acting, there is a 
feeling that motivates you to act—the craving. After acting, there is a feeling 
that teaches you to repeat the action in the future—the reward. 


Cue &gt; Craving (Feeling) &gt; Response &gt; Reward (Feeling) 


How we feel influences how we act, and how we act influences how we feel. 

Desire initiates. Pleasure sustains. Wanting and liking are the two drivers of 
behavior. If it’s not desirable, you have no reason to do it. Desire and craving are 
what initiate a behavior. But if it’s not enjoyable, you have no reason to repeat it. 
Pleasure and satisfaction are what sustain a behavior. Feeling motivated gets you 
to act. Feeling successful gets you to repeat. 

Hope declines with experience and is replaced by acceptance. The first 
time an opportunity arises, there is hope of what could be. Your expectation 
(cravings) is based solely on promise. The second time around, your expectation 
is grounded in reality. You begin to understand how the process works and your 
hope is gradually traded for a more accurate prediction and acceptance of the 
likely outcome. 

This is one reason why we continually grasp for the latest get-rich-quick or 


weight-loss scheme. New plans offer hope because we don’t have any 
experiences to ground our expectations. New strategies seem more appealing 
than old ones because they can have unbounded hope. As Aristotle noted, 
“Youth is easily deceived because it is quick to hope.” Perhaps this can be 
revised to “Youth is easily deceived because it only hopes.” There is no 
experience to root the expectation in. In the beginning, hope is all you have. 


How to Apply These Ideas to Business 


O. me vears, L’ Ve spoken at Fortune 500 companies and growing start-ups about 


how to apply the science of small habits to run more effective businesses and 
build better products. I’ve compiled many of the most practical strategies into a 
short bonus chapter. I think you’ll find it to be an incredibly useful addition to 
the main ideas mentioned in Atomic Habits. 


You can download this chapter at: atomichabits.com/business 


How to Apply These Ideas to Parenting 


O. or me MOst common questions I hear from readers is something along the 
lines of, “How can I get my kids to do this stuff?” The ideas in Atomic Habits 
are intended to apply broadly to all of human behavior (teenagers are humans, 
too), which means you should find plenty of useful strategies in the main text. 
That said, parenting does face its own set of challenges. As a bonus chapter, I’ve 
put together a brief guide on how to apply these ideas specifically to parenting. 


You can download this chapter at: atomichabits.com/parenting 


Acknowledgments 


I Have RELIED Heavy ON Others during the creation of this book. Before anyone else, I 


must thank my wife, Kristy, who has been indispensable throughout this process. 
She has played every role a person can play in the writing of a book: spouse, 
friend, fan, critic, editor, researcher, therapist. It is no exaggeration to say this 
book would not be the same without her. It might not exist at all. Like 
everything in our life, we did it together. 

Second, I am grateful to my family, not only for their support and 
encouragement on this book but also for believing in me no matter what project I 
happen to be working on. I have benefited from many years of support from my 
parents, grandparents, and siblings. In particular, I want my mom and dad to 
know that I love them. It is a special feeling to know that your parents are your 
greatest fans. 

Third, to my assistant, Lyndsey Nuckols. At this point, her job defies 
description as she has been asked to do nearly everything one could imagine for 
a small business. Thankfully, her skills and talents are more powerful than my 
questionable management style. Some sections of this book are as much hers as 
they are mine. I am deeply grateful for her help. 

As for the content and writing of the book, I have a long list of people to 
thank. To start, there are a few people from whom I have learned so much that it 
would be a crime to not mention them by name. Leo Babauta, Charles Duhigg, 
Nir Eyal, and BJ Fogg have each influenced my thoughts on habits in 
meaningful ways. Their work and ideas can be found sprinkled throughout this 
text. If you enjoyed this book, I’d encourage you to read their writing as well. 

At various stages of writing, I benefited from the guidance of many fine 
editors. Thanks to Peter Guzzardi for walking me through the early stages of the 
writing process and for a kick in the pants when I really needed it. I am indebted 
to Blake Atwood and Robin Dellabough for transforming my ugly and insanely 
long first drafts into a tight, readable manuscript. And I am thankful to Anne 
Barngrover for her ability to add a little class and poetic style to my writing. 

Pd like to thank the many people who read early versions of the manuscript, 
including Bruce Ammons, Darcey Ansell, Tim Ballard, Vishal Bhardwaj, 
Charlotte Blank, Jerome Burt, Sim Campbell, Al Carlos, Nicky Case, Julie 
Chang, Jason Collins, Debra Croy, Roger Dooley, Tiago Forte, Matt Gartland, 


Andrew Gierer, Randy Giffen, Jon Giganti, Adam Gilbert, Stephan Guyenet, 
Jeremy Hendon, Jane Horvath, Joakim Jansson, Josh Kaufman, Anne Kavanagh, 
Chris Klaus, Zeke Lopez, Cady Macon, Cyd Madsen, Kiera McGrath, Amy 
Mitchell, Anna Moise, Stacey Morris, Tara-Nicholle Nelson, Taylor Pearson, 
Max Shank, Trey Shelton, Jason Shen, Jacob Zangelidis, and Ari Zelmanow. 
The book benefited greatly from your feedback. 

To the team at Avery and Penguin Random House who made this book a 
reality, thank you. I owe a debt of special thanks to my publisher, Megan 
Newman
, for her endless patience as I continually pushed back deadlines. She 
gave me the space I needed to create a book I was proud of and championed my 
ideas at every step. To Nina, for her ability to transform my writing while still 
retaining my original message. To Lindsay, Farin, Casey, and the rest of the 
PRH team for spreading the message of this book to more people than I could 
ever reach on my own. To Pete Garceau, for designing a beautiful cover for this 
book. 

And to my agent, Lisa DiMona, for her guidance and insight at every step of 
the publishing process. 

To the many friends and family members who asked “How’s the book 
going?” and offered a word of encouragement when I inevitably replied 
“Slowly”—thank you. Every author faces a few dark moments when writing a 
book, and one kind word can be enough to get you to show up again the next 
day. 

I am sure there are people I have forgotten, but I keep an updated list of 
anyone who has influenced my thinking in meaningful ways at 
jamesclear.com/thanks, 

And finally, to you. Life is short and you have shared some of your precious 
time with me by reading this book. Thank you. 

—May 2018 


Notes 


I. mis secon, | have included a detailed list of notes, references, and citations for 


each chapter in the book. I trust that most readers will find this list to be 
sufficient. However, I also realize that scientific literature changes over time and 
the references for this book may need to be updated. Furthermore, I fully expect 
that I have made a mistake somewhere in this book—either in attributing an idea 
to the wrong person or not giving credit to someone where it is due. (If you 
believe this to be the case, please email me at james@jamesclear.com so I can 
fix the issue as soon as possible.) 

In addition to the notes below, you can find a full list of updated endnotes and 
corrections at atomichabits.com/endnotes. 


INTRODUCTION 


We all deal with setbacks: What about luck, you might ask? Luck matters, certainly. Habits are not the only thing that influence your success, but they are probably the most important factor that is 
within your control. And the only selfimprovement strategy that makes any sense is to focus on what you can control. 

The entrepreneur and investor Naval Ravikant: Naval Ravikant (@naval), “To write a great book, you must first become the book,” Twitter, May 15, 2018, 
https://twitter.com/naval/status/996460948029362176. 

“stimulus, response, reward”: B. F. Skinner, The Behavior of Organisms (New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1938). 

“cue, routine, reward”: Charles Duhigg, The Power of Habit: Why We Do What We Do in Life and Business (New York: Random House, 2014). 








CHAPTER 1 


just a single gold medal at the Olympic Games: Matt Slater, “How GB Cycling Went from Tragic to Magic,” BBC Sport, April 14, 2008, 
http://news.bbc.co.uk/sport2/hi/olympics/cycling/7534073.stm. 

the Tour de France: Tom Fordyce, “Tour de France 2017: Is Chris Froome Britain’s Least Loved Great Sportsman?” BBC Sport, July 23, 2017, https://www.bbc.com/sport/cycling/40692045. 

one of the top bike manufacturers in Europe refused to sell bikes: Richard Moore, Mastermind: How Dave Brailsford Reinvented the Wheel (Glasgow: BackPage Press, 2013). 

“The whole principle came from the idea”: Matt Slater, “Olympics Cycling: Marginal Gains Underpin Team GB Dominance,” BBC, August 8, 2012, https://www.bbc.com/sport/olympics/19174302. 

Brailsford and his coaches began by making small adjustments: Tim Harford, “Marginal Gains Matter but Gamechangers Transform,” Tim Harford, April 2017, 
http://timharford.com/2017/04/marginal-gains-matter-but-gamechangers-transform. 

they even painted the inside of the team truck white: Eben Harrell, “How 1% Performance Improvements Led to Olympic Gold,” Harvard Business Review, October 30, 2015, 
https://hbr.org/2015/10/how-1-performance-improvements-led-to-olympic-gold; Kevin Clark, “How a Cycling Team Turned the Falcons Into NFC Champions,” The Ringer, September 12, 
2017, https://www.theringer.com/nfl/2017/9/12/16293216/atlanta-falcons-thomas-dimitroff-cyclingteam-sky. 

Just five years after Brailsford took over: Technically, the British riders won 57 percent of the road and track cycling medals at the 2008 Olympics. Fourteen gold medals were available in road and 
track cycling events. The Brits won eight of them. 

the Brits raised the bar: “World and Olympic Records Set at the 2012 Summer Olympics,” Wikipedia, December 8, 2017, 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_and_Olympic_records_set_at_the_2012_Summer_Olympics#Cycling. 

Bradley Wiggins became the first British cyclist: Andrew Longmore, “Bradley Wiggins,” Encyclopaedia Britannica, https://www.britannica.com/biography/Bradley-Wiggins, last modified April 21, 
2018. 

Chris Froome won: Karen Sparks, “Chris Froome,” Encyclopaedia Britannica, https://www.britannica.com/biography/Chris-Froome, last modified October 23, 2017. 

During the ten-year span from 2007 to 2017: “Medals won by the Great Britain Cycling Team at world championships, Olympic Games and Paralympic Games since 2000,” British Cycling, 
https://www. britishcycling.org.uk/gbcyclingteam/article/Gbrst_gb-cyclingteam-GBCycling-Team-Medal-History—0?c=EN#K0dWAPjq84C V8Wzw.99, accessed June 8, 2018. 

you’|l end up thirty-seven times better: Jason Shen, an entrepreneur and writer, received an early look at this book. After reading this chapter, he remarked: “If the gains were linear, you’d predict to be 
3.65x better off. But because it is exponential, the improvement is actually 10x greater.” April 3, 2018. 

Habits are the compound interest: Many people have noted how habits multiply over time. Here are some of my favorite articles and books on the subject: Leo Babauta, “The Power of Habit 
Investments,” Zen Habits, January 28, 2013, https://zenhabits.net/bank; Morgan Housel, “The Freakishly Strong Base,” Collaborative Fund, October 31, 2017, 
http://www.collaborativefund.com/blog/the-freakishly-strong-base; Darren Hardy, The Compound Effect (New York: Vanguard Press, 2012). 

Accomplishing one extra task: As Sam Altman says, “A small productivity gain, compounded over 50 years, is worth a lot.” “Productivity,” Sam Altman. April 10, 2018, 
http://blog.samaltman.com/productivity. 

Habits are a double-edged sword: I’d like to credit Jason Hreha with originally describing habits to me in this way. Jason Hreha (@jhreha), “They’re a double edged sword,” Twitter, February 21, 
2018, https://twitter.com/jhreha/status/96643090737 1433984. 

The more tasks you can handle without thinking: Michael (@mmay3r), “The foundation of productivity is habits. The more you do automatically, the more you’re subsequently freed to do. This effect 
compounds,” Twitter, April 10, 2018, https://twitter.com/mmay3r/status/983837519274889216. 

each book you read not only teaches: This idea—that learning new ideas increases the value of your old ideas—is something I first heard about from Patrick O’Shaughnessy, who writes, “This is why 
knowledge compounds. Old stuff that was a 4/10 in value can become a 10/10, unlocked by another book in the future.” http://investorfieldguide.com/reading-tweet-storm. 

Cancer spends 80 percent of its life undetectable: “How to Live a Longer, Higher Quality Life, with Peter Attia, M.D.,” Investor’s Field Guide, March 7, 2017, http://investorfieldguide.com/attia. 

The San Antonio Spurs: Matt Moore, “NBA Finals: A Rock, Hammer and Cracking of Spurs’ Majesty in Game 7,” CBS Sports, June 21, 2013, https://www.cbssports.com/nba/news/nba-finals-a-rock- 
hammer-and-cracking-of-spurs-majesty-in-game-7. 

Inspiration for this drawing came from a tweet titled “Deception of linear vs exponential” by @MlichaelW. May 19, 2018. https://twitter.com/MlichaelW/status/997878086132817920. 

The seed of every habit: This paragraph was inspired by a quote from Mr. Mircea, an account on Twitter, who wrote, “each habit began its life as a single decision.” https://twitter.com/mistermircea. 

the goal cannot be what differentiates the winners from the losers: Hat tip to CrossFit coach Ben Bergeron for inspiring this quote during a conversation I had with him on February 28, 2017. 

You fall to the level of your systems: This line was inspired by the following quote from Archilochus: “We don’t rise to the level of our expectations, we fall to the level of our training.” 
































































































































CHAPTER 2 


You can imagine them like the layers of an onion: Hat tip to Simon Sinek. His “Golden Circle” framework is similar in design, but discusses different topics. For more, see Simon Sinek, Start with 
Why: How Great Leaders Inspire Everyone to Take Action (London: Portfolio/Penguin, 2013), 37. 

I resolved to stop chewing my nails: The quotes used in this section are presented as a conversation for reading clarity, but were originally written by Clark. See: Brian Clark, “The Powerful 
Psychological Boost that Helps You Make and Break Habits,” Further, November 14, 2017, https://further.net/pride-habits. 

Research has shown that once a person: Christopher J. Bryan et al., “Motivating Voter Turnout by Invoking the Self,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 108, no. 31 (2011): 12653- 
12656. 

There is internal pressure: Leon Festinger, A Theory of Cognitive Dissonance (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1957). 

Your identity is literally your “repeated beingness”: Technically, identidem is a word belonging to the Late Latin language. Also, thanks to Tamar Shippony, a reader of jamesclear.com, who 
originally told me about the etymology of the word identity, which she looked up in the American Heritage Dictionary. 

We change bit by bit: This is another reason atomic habits are such an effective form of change. If you change your identity too quickly and become someone radically different overnight, then you feel 
as if you lose your sense of self. But if you update and expand your identity gradually, you will find yourself reborn into someone totally new and yet still familiar. Slowly—habit by habit, 
vote by vote—you become accustomed to your new identity. Atomic habits and gradual improvement are the keys to identity change without identity loss. 














CHAPTER 3 


Edward Thorndike conducted an experiment: Peter Gray, Psychology, 6th ed. (New York: Worth, 2011), 108-109. 

“by some simple act, such as pulling at a loop of cord”: Edward L. Thorndike, “Animal Intelligence: An Experimental Study of the Associative Processes in Animals,” Psychological Review: 
Monograph Supplements 2, no. 4 (1898), doi:10.1037/h0092987. 

“behaviors followed by satisfying consequences”: This is an abbreviated version of the original quote from Thorndike, which reads: “responses that produce a satisfying effect in a particular situation 
become more likely to occur again in that situation, and responses that produce a discomforting effect become less likely to occur again in that situation.” For more, see Peter Gray, 
Psychology, 6th ed. (New York: Worth, 2011), 108-109. 

Neurological activity in the brain is high: Charles Duhigg, The Power of Habit: Why We Do What We Do in Life and Business (New York: Random House, 2014), 15; Ann M. Graybiel, “Network- 
Level Neuroplasticity in Cortico-Basal Ganglia Pathways,” Parkinsonism and Related Disorders 10, no. 5 (2004), doi:10.1016/j.parkreldis.2004.03.007. 

“Habits are, simply, reliable solutions”: Jason Hreha, “Why Our Conscious Minds Are Suckers for Novelty,” Revue, https://www.getrevue.co/profile/jason/issues/why-our-conscious-minds-are- 
suckers-for-novelty-54131, accessed June 8, 2018. 

As habits are created: John R. Anderson, “Acquisition of Cognitive Skill,” Psychological Review 89, no. 4 (1982), doi:10.1037/0033-295X.89.4.369. 

the brain remembers the past: Shahram Heshmat, “Why Do We Remember Certain Things, But Forget Others,” Psychology Today, October 8, 2015, 
https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/science-choice/201510/why-do-we-remember-certain-things-forget-others. 

the conscious mind is the bottleneck: William H. Gladstones, Michael A. Regan, and Robert B. Lee, “Division of Attention: The Single-Channel Hypothesis Revisited,” Quarterly Journal of 
Experimental Psychology Section A 41, no. 1 (1989), doi:10.1080/14640748908402350. 

the conscious mind likes to pawn off tasks: Daniel Kahneman, Thinking, Fast and Slow (New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2015). 

Habits reduce cognitive load: John R. Anderson, “Acquisition of Cognitive Skill,” Psychological Review 89, no. 4 (1982), doi:10.1037/0033-295X.89.4.369. 

Feelings of pleasure and disappointment: Antonio R. Damasio, The Strange Order of Things: Life, Feeling, and the Making of Cultures (New York: Pantheon Books, 2018); Lisa Feldman Barrett, 
How Emotions Are Made (London: Pan Books, 2018). 






































CHAPTER 4 


The psychologist Gary Klein: I originally heard about this story from Daniel Kahneman, but it was confirmed by Gary Klein in an email on March 30, 2017. Klein also covers the story in his own book, 
which uses slightly different quotes: Gary A. Klein, Sources of Power: How People Make Decisions (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1998), 43—44. 

military analysts can identify which blip on a radar screen: Gary A. Klein, Sources of Power: How People Make Decisions (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1998), 38—40. 

Museum curators have been known to discern: The story of the Getty kouros, covered in Malcolm Gladwell’s book Blink, is a famous example. The sculpture, initially believed to be from ancient 
Greece, was purchased for $10 million. The controversy surrounding the sculpture happened later when one expert identified it as a forgery upon first glance. 

Experienced radiologists can look at a brain scan: Siddhartha Mukherjee, “The Algorithm Will See You Now,” New Yorker, April 3, 2017, https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2017/04/03/ai- 
versus-md. 

The human brain is a prediction machine: The German physician Hermann von Helmholtz developed the idea of the brain being a “prediction machine.” 

the clerk swiped the customer’s actual credit card: Helix van Boron, “What’s the Dumbest Thing You’ve Done While Your Brain Is on Autopilot,” Reddit, August 21, 2017, 
https://www.reddit.com/1/AskReddit/comments/6v1t91/whats_the_dumbest_thing_youve_done_while_your/dlxa5y9. 

she kept asking coworkers if they had washed their hands: SwordOfTheLlama, “What Strange Habits Have You Picked Up from Your Line of Work,” Reddit, January 4, 2016, 
https://www.reddit.com/1/AskReddit/comments/3zckq6/what_strange_habits_have_you_picked_up_from_your/cyl3nta. 

story of a man who had spent years working as a lifeguard: SwearlmaChick, “What Strange Habits Have You Picked Up from Your Line of Work,” Reddit, January 4, 2016, 
https://www.reddit.com/r/AskReddit/comments/3zckq6/what_strange_habits_have_you_picked_up_from_your/cyl681q. 

“Until you make the unconscious conscious”: Although this quote by 






































Jung is popular, I had trouble tracking down the original source. It’s probably a paraphrase of this passage: “The psychological 

tule says that when an inner situation is not made conscious, it happens outside, as fate. That is to say, when the individual remains undivided and does not become conscious of his inner 
opposite, the world must perforce act out the conflict and be torn into opposing halves.” For more, see C. G. Jung, Aion: Researches into the Phenomenology of the Self (Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press, 1959), 71. 

Pointing-and-Calling reduces errors: Alice Gordenker, “JR Gestures,” Japan Times, October 21, 2008, https://www.japantimes.co.jp/news/2008/10/21/reference/jr-gestures/#.WvIG49Mvzul. 

The MTA subway system in New York City: Allan Richarz, “Why Japan’s Rail Workers Can’t Stop Pointing at Things,” Atlas Obscura, March 29, 2017, 
https://www.atlasobscura.com/articles/pointing-and-calling-japan-trains. 

















CHAPTER 5 


researchers in Great Britain began working: Sarah Milne, Sheina Orbell, and Paschal Sheeran, “Combining Motivational and Volitional Interventions to Promote Exercise Participation: Protection 
Motivation Theory and Implementation Intentions,” British Journal of Health Psychology 7 (May 2002): 163-184. 

implementation intentions are effective: Peter Gollwitzer and Paschal Sheeran, “Implementation Intentions and Goal Achievement: A Meta-Analysis of Effects and Processes,” Advances in 
Experimental Social Psychology 38 (2006): 69-119. 

writing down the exact time and date of when you will get a flu shot: Katherine L. Milkman, John Beshears, James J. Choi, David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian, “Using Implementation Intentions 
Prompts to Enhance Influenza Vaccination Rates,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 108, no. 26 (June 2011): 10415-10420. 

recording the time of your colonoscopy appointment: Katherine L. Milkman, John Beshears, James J. Choi, David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian, “Planning Prompts as a Means of Increasing 
Preventive Screening Rates,” Preventive Medicine 56, no. 1 (January 2013): 92-93. 

voter turnout increases: David W. Nickerson and Todd Rogers, “Do You Have a Voting Plan? Implementation Intentions, Voter Turnout, and Organic Plan Making,” Psychological Science 21, no. 2 
(2010): 194-199. 

Other successful government programs: “Policymakers around the World Are Embracing Behavioural Science,” The Economist, May 18, 2017, 
https://www.economist.com/news/international/21722163-experimental-iterative-data-driven-approach-gaining-ground-policymakers-around. 

people who make a specific plan for when and where: Edwin Locke and Gary Latham, “Building a Practically Useful Theory of Goal Setting and Task Motivation: A 35-Year Odyssey,” American 
Psychologist 57, no. 9 (2002): 705-717, doi:10.1037//0003—-066x.57.9.705. 

hope is usually higher: Hengchen Dai, Katherine L. Milkman, and Jason Riis, “The Fresh Start Effect: Temporal Landmarks Motivate Aspirational Behavior,” PsycEXTRA Dataset, 2014, 
doi:10.1037/e513702014—058. 

writer Jason Zweig noted: Jason Zweig, “Elevate Your Financial IQ: A Value Packed Discussion with Jason Zweig,” interview by Shane Parrish, The Knowledge Project, Farnam Street, audio, 
https://www.fs.blog/2015/10/jason-zweig-knowledge-project. 

many ways to use implementation intentions: For the term habit stacking, I am indebted to S. J. Scott, who wrote a book by the same name. From what I understand, his concept is slightly different, 
but I like the term and thought it appropriate to use in this chapter. Previous writers such as Courtney Carver and Julien Smith have also used the term habit stacking, but in different 





























contexts. 
The French philosopher Denis Diderot: “Denis Diderot,” New World Encyclopedia, http://www.newworldencyclopedia.org/entry/Denis_Diderot, last modified October 26, 2017. 








acquired a scarlet robe: Encyclopedia Britannica, vol. 8 (1911), s.v. “Denis Diderot.” Diderot’s scarlet robe is frequently described as a gift from a friend. However, I could find no original source 


claiming it was a gift nor any mention of the friend who supplied the robe. If you happen to know any historians specializing in robe acquisitions, feel free to point them my way so we can 
clarify the mystery of the source of Diderot’s famous scarlet robe. 

“no more coordination, no more unity, no more beauty”: Denis Diderot, “Regrets for My Old Dressing Gown,” trans. Mitchell Abidor, 2005, 
https://www.marxists.org/reference/archive/diderot/1769/regrets.htm. 

The Diderot Effect states: Juliet Schor, The Overspent American: Why We Want What We Don’t Need (New York: HarperPerennial, 1999). 

which was created by BJ Fogg: In this chapter, I used the term habit stacking to refer to linking a new habit to an old one. For this idea, I give credit to BJ Fogg. In his work, Fogg uses the term 
anchoring to describe this approach because your old habit acts as an “anchor” that keeps the new one in place. No matter what term you prefer, I believe it is a very effective strategy. You 
can learn more about Fogg’s work and his Tiny Habits Method at https://www.tinyhabits.com. 

“One in, one out”: Dev Basu (@devbasu), “Have a one-in-one-out policy when buying things,” Twitter, February 11, 2018, https://twitter.com/devbasu/status/962778141965000704. 

















CHAPTER 6 


Anne Thorndike: Anne N. Thorndike et al., “A 2-Phase Labeling and Choice Architecture Ini 
(2012), doi:10.2105/ajph.2011.300391. 
choose products not because of what they are: Multiple research studies have shown that 





tervention to Improve Healthy Food and Beverage Choices,” American Journal of Public Health 102, no. 3 


the mere sight of food can make us feel hungry even when we don’t have actual physiological hunger. 


According to one researcher, “dietary behaviors are, in large part, the consequence of automatic responses to contextual food cues.” For more, see D. A. Cohen and S. H. Babey, 


“Contextual Influence: 
Lynn D. Magson, and John E. Blundell, “Hunger and Palatability: Trac 
Food,” Appetite 5, no. 4 (1984), doi:10.1016/s0195—6663(84)80008-2. 
Behavior is a function of the Person in their Environment: Kurt Lewin, Principles of Topol 
Suggestion Impulse Buying: Hawkins Stern, “The Significance of Impulse Buying Tod 
45 percent of Coca-Cola sales: Mi 
down-the-produce-aisle.html?_r=0. 
People drink Bud Light because: The more exposure people have to food, the more likely 
Outlets, Takeaway Food Consumption, and Body Weight in Cambridges 
doi:10.1136/bmj.g1464. 





jay,” Jo 














s on Eating Behaviours: Heuristic Processing and Dietary Choices,” Obesity Reviews 13, no. 9 (2012), doi:10.1111/j.1467—789x.2012.01001.x; and Andrew J. Hill, 
king Ratings of Subjective Experience Before, during and after the Consumption of Preferred and Less Preferred 


logical Psychology (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1936). 
urnal of Marketing 26, no. 2 (1962), doi:10.2307/1248439. 


chael Moss, “Nudged to the Produce Aisle by a Look in the Mirror,” New York Times, August 27, 2013, https://www.nytimes.com/2013/08/28/dining/wooing-us- 





they are to purchase it and eat it. T. Burgoine et al., “Associations between Exposure to Takeaway Food 
hire, UK: Population Based, Cross Sectional Study,” British Medical Journal 348, no. 5 (2014), 


The human body has about eleven million sensory receptors: Timothy D. Wilson, Strangers to Ourselves: Discovering the Adaptive Unconscious (Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press, 2004), 24. 





half of the brain’s resources are used on vision: B. R. Sheth et al., “Orientation Maps 
When their energy use was obvious and easy to track: This story was told to Donel. 








a Mea 





Thinking in Systems: A Primer (White River Junction, VT: Chelsea Green, 2015) 


the stickers cut bathroom cleaning costs: The actual estimate was 8 percent, but given the 





Evans-Pritchard, “Aiming to Reduce Cleaning Costs,” Works That Work, Winter 


sleeping . . . was the only action that happened in that room: “Techniques involving stimul 





of Subjective Contours in Visual Cortex,” Science 274, no. 5295 (1996), doi:10.1126/science.274.5295.2110. 


lows at a conference in Kollekolle, Denmark, in 1973. For more, see Donella Meadows and Diana Wright, 
, 109. 

variables used, anywhere between 5 percent and 10 percent savings annually is a reasonable guess. Blake 
2013, https://worksthatwork.com/1/urinal-fly. 

us control have even been successfully used to help people with insomnia. In short, those who had trouble 





falling asleep were told to only go to their room and lie in their bed when they were tired. If they couldn’t fall asleep, they were told to get up and change rooms. Strange advice, but over 


time, researchers found that by associating the bed with ‘It’s time to go to slee] 


quickly fall asleep due to the repeated process: it became almost automatic to fal 


p° and not with other activities (reading a book, just lying there, etc.), participants were eventually able to 
l asleep in their bed because a successful trigger had been created.” For more, see Charles M. Morin et al., 


“Psychological and Behavioral Treatment of Insomnia: Update of the Recent Evidence (1998-2004),” Sleep 29, no. 11 (2006), doi:10.1093/sleep/29.11.1398; and Gregory Ciotti, “The 


Best Way to Change Your Habits? Control Your Environment,” Sparring Mind, 


habits can be easier to change in a new environment: S. Thompson, J. Michaelson, S. Abdal 





Behaviour: A Report to the Department for Environment, 
Document=MomentsofChangeE V0506FinalReport Nov2011(2).pdf. 





when you step outside your normal environment: Various research studies have found that 
television watching habits when they transfer schools. Wendy Wood and David 





Behavioral Science and Policy 2, no. 1 (2016), doi:10.1353/bsp.2016.0008; W. 
Social Psychology 88, no. 6 (2005), doi:10.1037/0022—3514.88.6.918 


Food 


https://www.spatringmind.com/changing-habits. 
ah, V. Johnson, D. Morris, K. Riley, and A. Simms, ‘Moments of Change’ as Opportunities for Influencing 
and Rural Affairs (London: Defra, 2011), _ http://randd.defra.gov.uk/Document.aspx? 








it is easier to change your behavior when your environment changes. For example, students change their 
T. Neal, “Healthy through Habit: Interventions for Initiating and Maintaining Health Behavior Change,” 
Wood, L. Tam, and M. G. Witt, “Changing Circumstances, Disrupting Habits,” Journal of Personality and 





You aren’t battling old environmental cues: Perhaps this is why 36 percent of successful changes in behavior were associated with a move to a new place. Melissa Guerrero-Witt, Wendy Wood, and 
Leona Tam, “Changing Circumstances, Disrupting Habits,” PsycEXTRA Dataset 88, no. 6 (2005), doi:10.1037/e529412014-144. 





CHAPTER 7 


Follow-up research revealed that 35 percent of service members: Lee N. Robins et al., “Vietnam Veterans Three Years after Vietnam: How Our Study Changed Our View of Heroin,” American 
Journal on Addictions 19, no. 3 (2010), doi:10.1111/j.1521-0391.2010.00046.x. 

the creation of the Special Action Office of Drug Abuse Prevention: “Excerpts from President’s Message on Drug Abuse Control,” New York Times, June 18, 1971, 
https://www.nytimes.com/1971/06/18/archives/excerpts-from-presidents-message-on-drug-abuse-control.html. 

nine out of ten soldiers who used heroin in Vietnam: Lee N. Robins, Darlene H. Davis, and David N. Nurco, “How Permanent Was Vietnam Drug Addiction?” American Journal of Public Health 64, 
no. 12 (suppl.) (1974), doi:10.2105/ajph.64.12_suppl.38. 

90 percent of heroin users become readdicted: Bobby P. Smyth et al., “Lapse and Relapse following Inpatient Treatment of Opiate Dependence,” Irish Medical Journal 103, no. 6 (June 2010). 

“disciplined” people are better at structuring their lives: Wilhelm Hofmann et al., “Everyday Temptations: An Experience Sampling Study on How People Control Their Desires,” PsycEXTRA 
Dataset 102, no. 6 (2012), doi:10.1037/e634112013-146. 

It’s easier to practice self-restraint when you don’t have to use it: “Our prototypical model of self-control is angel on one side and devil on the other, and they battle it out. . . . We tend to think of 
people with strong willpower as people who are able to fight this battle effectively. Actually, the people who are really good at self-control never have these battles in the first place.” For 
more, see Brian Resnick, “The Myth of Self-Control,” Vox, November 24, 2016, https://www.vox.com/science-and-health/2016/11/3/13486940/self-control-psychology-myth. 

A habit that has been encoded in the mind is ready to be used: Wendy Wood and Dennis Riinger, “Psychology of Habit,” Annual Review of Psychology 67, no. 1 (2016), doi:10.1146/annurev-psych- 
122414033417. 

The cues were still internalized: “The Biology of Motivation and Habits: Why We Drop the Ball,” Therapist Uncensored), 20:00, http://www.therapistuncensored.com/biology-of-motivation-habits, 
accessed June 8, 2018. 

Shaming obese people with weight-loss presentations: Sarah E. Jackson, Rebecca J. Beeken, and Jane Wardle, “Perceived Weight Discrimination and Changes in Weight, Waist Circumference, and 
Weight Status,” Obesity, 2014, doi:10.1002/oby.20891. 

Showing pictures of blackened lungs to smokers: Kelly McGonigal, The Upside of Stress: Why Stress Is Good for You, and How to Get Good at It (New York: Avery, 2016), xv. 

showing addicts a picture of cocaine for just thirty-three milliseconds: Fran Smith, “How Science Is Unlocking the Secrets of Addiction,” National Geographic, September 2017, 
https://www.nationalgeographic.com/magazine/2017/09/the-addicted-brain. 















































CHAPTER 8 


Niko Tinbergen performed a series of experiments: Nikolaas Tinbergen, The Herring Gull’s World (London: Collins, 1953); “Nikolaas Tinbergen,” New World Encyclopedia, 
http://www.newworldencyclopedia.org/entry/Nikolaas_Tinbergen, last modified September 30, 2016. 

the goose will pull any nearby round object: James L. Gould, Ethology: The Mechanisms and Evolution of Behavior (New York: Norton, 1982), 36-41. 

the modern food industry relies on stretching: Steven Witherly, Why Humans Like Junk Food (New York: [Universe, 2007). 

Nearly every food in a bag: “Tweaking Tastes and Creating Cravings,” 60 Minutes, November 27, 2011. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=a7Wh3ugqlyTc. 

French fries . . . are a potent combination: Steven Witherly, Why Humans Like Junk Food (New York: [Universe, 2007). 

such strategies enable food scientists to find the “bliss point”: Michael Moss, Salt, Sugar, Fat: How the Food Giants Hooked Us (London: Allen, 2014). 

“We’ve gotten too good at pushing our own buttons”: This quote originally appeared in Stephan Guyenet, “Why Are Some People ‘Carboholics’?” July 26, 2017, 
http://www.stephanguyenet.com/why-are-some-people-carboholics. The adapted version is given with permission granted in an email exchange with the author in April 2018. 

The importance of dopamine: “The importance of dopamine was discovered by accident. In 1954, James Olds and Peter Milner, two neuroscientists at McGill University, decided to implant an 
electrode deep into the center of a rat’s brain. The precise placement of the electrode was largely happenstance; at the time, the geography of the mind remained a mystery. But Olds and 
Milner got lucky. They inserted the needle right next to the nucleus accumbens (NAcc), a part of the brain that generates pleasurable feelings. Whenever you eat a piece of chocolate cake, 
or listen to a favorite pop song, or watch your favorite team win the World Series, it is your NAcc that helps you feel so happy. But Olds and Milner quickly discovered that too much 
pleasure can be fatal. They placed the electrodes in several rodents’ brains and then ran a small current into each wire, making the NAccs continually excited. The scientists noticed that the 
rodents lost interest in everything. They stopped eating and drinking. All courtship behavior ceased. The rats would just huddle in the corners of their cages, transfixed by their bliss. Within 
days, all of the animals had perished. They died of thirst. For more, see Jonah Lehrer, How We Decide (Boston: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2009). 

neurological processes behind craving and desire: James Olds and Peter Milner, “Positive Reinforcement Produced by Electrical Stimulation of Septal Area and Other Regions of Rat Brain,” Journal 
of Comparative and Physiological Psychology 47, no. 6 (1954), doi:10.1037/h0058775. 

rats lost all will to live: Qun-Yong Zhou and Richard D. Palmiter, “Dopamine-Deficient Mice Are Severely Hypoactive, Adipsic, and Aphagic,” Cell 83, no. 7 (1995), doi:10.1016/0092— 
8674(95)90145-0. 

without desire, action stopped: Kent C. Berridge, Isabel L. Venier, and Terry E. Robinson, “Taste Reactivity Analysis of 6-Hydroxydopamine-Induced Aphagia: Implications for Arousal and 
Anhedonia Hypotheses of Dopamine Function,” Behavioral Neuroscience 103, no. 1 (1989), doi:10.1037//0735—7044.103.1.36. 

the mice developed a craving so strong: Ross A. Mcdevitt et al., “Serotonergic versus Nonserotonergic Dorsal Raphe Projection Neurons: Differential Participation in Reward Circuitry,” Cell Reports 
8, no. 6 (2014), doi:10.1016/j.cel rep.2014.08.037. 

the average slot machine player: Natasha Dow Schiill, Addiction by Design: Machine Gambling in Las Vegas (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2014), 55. 

Habits are a dopamine-driven feedback loop: I first heard the term dopamine-driven feedback loop from Chamath Palihapitiya. For more, see “Chamath Palihapitiya, Founder and CEO Social Capital, 
on Money as an Instrument of Change,” Stanford Graduate School of Business, November 13, 2017, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PMotykw0SIk. 

dopamine . . . plays a central role in many neurological processes: Researchers later discovered that endorphins and opioids were responsible for pleasure responses. For more, see V. S. Chakravarthy, 
Denny Joseph, and Raju S. Bapi, “What Do the Basal Ganglia Do? A Modeling Perspective,” Biological Cybernetics 103, no. 3 (2010), doi:10.1007/s00422-010-0401-y. 

dopamine is released not only when you experience pleasure: Wolfram Schultz, “Neuronal Reward and Decision Signals: From Theories to Data,” Physiological Reviews 95, no. 3 (2015), 
doi:10.1152/physrev.00023.2014, fig. 8; Fran Smith, “How Science Is Unlocking the Secrets of Addiction,” National Geographic, September 2017, 
https://www.nationalgeographic.com/magazine/2017/09/the-addicted-brain. 

whenever dopamine rises, so does your motivation: Dopamine compels you to seek, explore, and take action: “Dopamine-energized, this mesolimbic SEEKING system, arising from the ventral 
tegmental area (VTA), encourages foraging, exploration, investigation, curiosity, interest and expectancy. Dopamine fires each time the rat (or human) explores its environment. . . . I can 
look at the animal and tell when I am tickling its SEEKING system because it is exploring and sniffing.” For more, see Karin Badt, “Depressed? Your ‘SEEKING’ System Might Not Be 
Working: A Conversation with Neuroscientist Jaak Panksepp,” Huffington Post, December 6, 2017, _http://www.huffingtonpost.com/karin-badt/depressed-your-seeking- 
sy_b_3616967.html. 

the reward system that is activated in the brain: Wolfram Schultz, “Multiple Reward Signals in the Brain,” Nature Reviews Neuroscience 1, no. 3 (2000), doi:10.1038/35044563. 

100 percent of the nucleus accumbens is activated during wanting: Kent Berridge, conversation with author, March 8, 2017. 

Byrne hacked his stationary bike: Hackster Staff, “Netflix and Cycle!,” Hackster, July 12, 2017, https://blog.hackster.io/netflix-and-cycle-1734d0179deb. 

“eliminating obesity one Netflix binge at a time”: “Cycflix: Exercise Powered Entertainment,” Roboro, July 8, 2017, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-ncOirLB-iY. 

“We see Thursday night as a viewership opportunity”: Jeanine Poggi, “Shonda Rhimes Looks Beyond ABC’s Nighttime Soaps,” AdAge, May 16, 2016, http://adage.com/article/special-report-tv- 
upfront/shonda-rhimes-abc-soaps/303996. 

“more probable behaviors will reinforce less probable behaviors”: Jon E. Roeckelein, Dictionary of Theories, Laws, and Concepts in Psychology (Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1998), 384. 































































































CHAPTER 9 


“A genius is not born, but is educated and trained”: Harold Lundstrom, “Father of 3 Prodigies Says Chess Genius Can Be Taught,” Deseret News, December 25, 1992, 
https://www.deseretnews.com/article/266378/F A THER-OF-3-PRODIGIES-SA YS-CHESS-GENIUS-CAN-BE-TAUGHT html?pg=all. 

We imitate the habits of three groups: Peter J. Richerson and Robert Boyd, Not by Genes Alone: How Culture Transformed Human Evolution (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2006). 

“a person’s chances of becoming obese increased by 57 percent”: Nicholas A. Christakis and James H. Fowler, “The Spread of Obesity in a Large Social Network over 32 Years,” New England 
Journal of Medicine 357, no. 4 (2007), doi:10.1056/nejmsa066082. J. A. Stockman, “The Spread of Obesity in a Large Social Network over 32 Years,” Yearbook of Pediatrics 2009 
(2009), doi:10.1016/s0084—3954(08)79134-6. 

if one person in a relationship lost weight: Amy A. Gorin et al., “Randomized Controlled Trial Examining the Ripple Effect of a Nationally Available Weight Management Program on Untreated 
Spouses,” Obesity 26, no. 3 (2018), doi:10.1002/oby.22098. 

Of the ten people in the class, four became astronauts: Mike Massimino, “Finding the Difference Between ‘Improbable’ and ‘Impossible, 
January 2017, https://jamesaltucher.com/2017/01/mike-massimino-i-am-not-good-enough. 

the higher your best friend’s IQ at age eleven or twelve: Ryan Meldrum, Nicholas Kavish, and Brian Boutwell, “On the Longitudinal Association Between Peer and Adolescent Intelligence: Can Our 
Friends Make Us Smarter?,” PsyArXiv, February 10, 2018, doi:10.17605/OSF.IO/TVJ9Z. 

Solomon Asch conducted a series of experiments: Harold Steere Guetzkow, Groups, Leadership and Men: Research in Human Relations (Pittsburgh, PA: Carnegie Press, 1951), 177-190. 

By the end of the experiment, nearly 75 percent of the subjects: Follow-up studies show that if there was just one actor in the group who disagreed with the group, then the subject was far more likely 
to state their true belief that the lines were different lengths. When you have an opinion that dissents from the tribe, it is much easier to stand by it if you have an ally. When you need the 
strength to stand up to the social norm, find a partner. For more, see Solomon E. Asch, “Opinions and Social Pressure,” Scientific American 193, no. 5 (1955), 
doi:10.1038/scientificamerican1155—31; and William N. Morris and Robert S. Miller, “The Effects of Consensus-Breaking and Consensus-Preempting Partners on Reduction of 
Conformity,” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 11, no. 3 (1975), doi:10.1016/s0022—1031(75)80023-0. 

Nearly 75 percent of subjects made the incorrect choice at least once. However, considering the total number of responses throughout the experiment, about two thirds were correct. Either 
way, the point stands: group pressure can significantly alter our ability to make accurate decisions. 

a chimpanzee learns an effective way: Lydia V. Luncz, Giulia Sirianni, Roger Mundry, and Christophe Boesch. “Costly culture: differences in nut-cracking efficiency between wild chimpanzee 

groups.” Animal Behaviour 137 (2018): 63-73. 

















interview by James Altucher, The James Altucher Show, 




















CHAPTER 10 


I wouldn’t say, “Because I need food to survive”: I heard a similar example from the Twitter account, simpolism (@simpolism), “Let’s extend this metaphor. If society is a human body, then the state 
is the brain. Humans are unaware of their motives. If asked ‘why do you eat?’ you might say ‘bc food tastes good’ and not ‘bc I need food to survive.’ What might a state’s food be? (hint: 
are pills food?),” Twitter, May 7, 2018, https://twitter.com/simpolism/status/993632142700826624. 

when emotions and feelings are impaired: Antoine Bechara et al., “Insensitivity to Future Consequences following Damage to Human Prefrontal Cortex,” Cognition 50, no. 1-3 (1994), 
doi:10.1016/0010—-0277(94)90018-3. 

As the neuroscientist Antonio Damasio: “When Emotions Make Better Decisions—Antonio Damasio,” August 11, 2009. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lwup_K2WNOI 

You don’t “have” to. You “get” to: I am indebted to my college strength and conditioning coach, Mark Watts, who originally shared this simple mind-set shift with me. 

‘Im not confined to my wheelchair”: RedheadBanshee, “What Is Something Someone Said That Forever Changed Your Way of Thinking,” Reddit, October 22, 2014, 
https://www.reddit.com/r/AskReddit/comments/2jzn0j/what_is_something_someone_said_that_forever/clgm4s2. 

“It’s time to build endurance and get fast”: WingedAdventurer, “Instead of Thinking ‘Go Run in the Morning,’ Think ‘Go Build Endurance and Get Fast.’ Make Your Habit a Benefit, Not a Task,” 
Reddit, January 19, 2017, https://www.reddit.com/r/selfimprovement/comments/Sovrqf/instead_of_thinking_go_run_in_the_morning_think/?st=izmz9pks&amp;sh=059312db. 

“I’m getting an adrenaline rush to help me concentrate”: Alison Wood Brooks, “Get Excited: Reappraising Pre-Performance Anxiety as Excitement with Minimal Cues,” PsycEXTRA Dataset, June 
2014, doi:10.1037/e578192014—321; Caroline Webb, How to Have a Good Day (London: Pan Books, 2017), 238. “Wendy Berry Mendes and Jeremy Jamieson have conducted a number 
of studies [that] show that people perform better when they decide to interpret their fast heartbeat and breathing as ‘a resource that aids performance.’” 

Ed Latimore, a boxer and writer: Ed Latimore (@EdLatimore), “Odd realization: My focus and concentration goes up just by putting my headphones [on] while writing. I don’t even have to play any 
music,” Twitter, May 7, 2018, https://twitter.com/EdLatimore/status/993496493171662849. 









































CHAPTER 11 


In the end, they had little to show for their efforts: This story comes from page 29 of Art &amp; Fear by David Bayles and Ted Orland. In an email conversation with Orland on October 18, 2016, he 
explained the origins of the story. “Yes, the ‘ceramics story’ in ‘Art &amp; Fear’ is indeed true, allowing for some literary license in the retelling. Its real-world origin was as a gambit employed 
by photographer Jerry Uelsmann to motivate his Beginning Photography students at the University of Florida. As retold in ‘Art &amp; Fear’ it faithfully captures the scene as Jerry told it to me 
—except I replaced photography with ceramics as the medium being explored. Admittedly, it would’ve been easier to retain photography as the art medium being discussed, but David 
Bayles (co-author) &amp; I are both photographers ourselves, and at the time we were consciously trying to broaden the range of media being referenced in the text. The intriguing thing to me 
is that it hardly matters what art form was invoked—the moral of the story appears to hold equally true straight across the whole art spectrum (and even outside the arts, for that matter).” 
Later in that same email, Orland said, “You have our permission to reprint any or all of the ‘ceramics’ passage in your forthcoming book.” In the end, I settled on publishing an adapted 
version, which combines their telling of the ceramics story with facts from the original source of Uelsmann’s photography students. David Bayles and Ted Orland, Art &amp; Fear: 
Observations on the Perils (and Rewards) of Artmaking (Santa Cruz, CA: Image Continuum Press, 1993), 29. 

As Voltaire once wrote: Voltaire, La Bégueule. Conte Moral (1772). 

long-term potentiation: Long-term potentiation was discovered by Terje Lomo in 1966. More precisely, he discovered that when a series of signals was repeatedly transmitted by the brain, there was a 
persistent effect that lasted afterward that made it easier for those signals to be transmitted in the future. 

“Neurons that fire together wire together”: Donald O. Hebb, The Organization of Behavior: A Neuropsychological Theory (New York: Wiley, 1949). 

In musicians, the cerebellum: S. Hutchinson, “Cerebellar Volume of Musicians,” Cerebral Cortex 13, no. 9 (2003), doi:10.1093/cercor/13.9.943. 

Mathematicians, meanwhile, have increased gray matter: A. Verma, “Increased Gray Matter Density in the Parietal Cortex of Mathematicians: A Voxel-Based Morphometry Study,” Yearbook of 
Neurology and Neurosurgery 2008 (2008), doi:10.1016/s0513-5117(08)79083-5. 

When scientists analyzed the brains of taxi drivers in London: Eleanor A. Maguire et al., “Navigation-Related Structural Change in the Hippocampi of Taxi Drivers,” Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences 97, no. 8 (2000), doi:10.1073/pnas.070039597; Katherine Woollett and Eleanor A. Maguire, “Acquiring ‘the Knowledge’ of London’s Layout Drives Structural Brain 
Changes,” Current Biology 21, no. 24 (December 2011), doi:10.1016/j.cub.2011.11.018; Eleanor A. Maguire, Katherine Woollett, and Hugo J. Spiers, “London Taxi Drivers and Bus 
Drivers: A Structural MRI and Neuropsychological Analysis,” Hippocampus 16, no. 12 (2006), doi:10.1002/hipo.20233. 

“the actions become so automatic”: George Henry Lewes, The Physiology of Common Life (Leipzig: Tauchnitz, 1860). 

repetition is a form of change: Apparently, Brian Eno says the same thing in his excellent, creatively inspiring Oblique Strategies card set, which I didn’t know when I wrote this line! Great minds and 
all that. 

Automaticity is the ability to perform a behavior: Phillippa Lally et al., “How Are Habits Formed: Modelling Habit Formation in the Real World,” European Journal of Social Psychology 40, no. 6 
(2009), doi:10.1002/ejsp.674. 

habits form based on frequency, not time: Hermann Ebbinghaus was the first person to describe learning curves in his 1885 book Uber das Gedächtnis. Hermann Ebbinghaus, Memory: A Contribution 
to Experimental Psychology (United States: Scholar Select, 2016). 


























CHAPTER 12 


this difference in shape played a significant role in the spread of agriculture: Jared Diamond, Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies (New York: Norton, 1997). 

It is human nature to follow the Law of Least Effort: Deepak Chopra uses the phrase “law of least effort” to describe one of his Seven Spiritual Laws of Yoga. This concept is not related to the 
principle I am discussing here. 

a garden hose that is bent in the middle: This analogy is a modified version of an idea Josh Waitzkin mentioned in his interview with Tim Ferriss. “The Tim Ferriss Show, Episode 2: Josh Waitzkin,” 
May 2, 2014, audio, https://soundcloud.com/tim-ferriss/the-tim-ferriss-show-episode-2-josh-waitzkin. 

“it took American workers three times as long to assemble their sets”: James Surowiecki, “Better All the Time,” New “Yorker, November 10, 2014, 
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2014/11/10/better-time. 

addition by subtraction: Addition by subtraction is an example of a larger principle known as inversion, which I have written about previously at https://jamesclear.com/inversion. I’m indebted to Shane 
Parrish for priming my thoughts on this topic by writing about why “avoiding stupidity is easier than seeking brilliance.” Shane Parrish, “Avoiding Stupidity Is Easier Than Seeking 
Brilliance,” Farnam Street, June 2014, https://www.fs.blog/2014/0G/avoiding-stupidity. 

those percentage points represent millions in tax revenue: Owain Service et al., “East: Four Simple Ways to Apply Behavioural Insights,” Behavioural Insights Team, 2015, 
http://38r80m2xjhhl25mw24492dir.wpengine.netdna-cdn.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/07/BIT-Publication-EAST_FA_WEB.pdf. 

Nuckols dialed in his cleaning habits: Oswald Nuckols is an alias, used by request. 

“perfect time to clean the toilet”: Saul_Panzer_NY, “[Question] What One Habit Literally Changed Your Life?” Reddit, June 5, 2017, https://www.reddit.com/r/get 
disciplined/comments/6fgqbv/question_what_one_habit_literally_changed_your/diieswq. 






































CHAPTER 13 


“arsenal of routines”: Twyla Tharp and Mark Reiter, The Creative Habit: Learn It and Use It for Life: A Practical Guide (New York: Simon and Schuster, 2006). 
40 to 50 percent of our actions on any given day are done out of habit: Wendy Wood, “Habits Across the Lifespan,” 2006, 


https://www.researchgate.net/publication/315552294_Habits_Across_the_Lifespan. 
habits you follow without thinking: Benjamin Gardner, “A Review and Analysis of the Use of ‘Habit’ in Understanding, Predicting and Influencing Health-Related Behaviour,” Health Psychology 


Review 9, no. 3 (2014), doi:10.1080/17437199.2013.876238. 
decisive moments: Shoutout to Henri Cartier-Bresson, one of the greatest street photographers of all time, who coined the term decisive moment, but for an entirely different purpose: capturing amazing 











images at just the right time. 
the Two-Minute Rule: Hat tip to David Allen, whose version of the Two-Minute Rule states, “If it takes less than two minutes, then do it now.” For more, see David Allen, Getting Things Done (New 


York: Penguin, 2015). 

power-down habit: Author Cal Newport uses a shutdown ritual in which he does a last email inbox check, prepares his to-do list for the next day, and says “shutdown complete” to end work for the day. 
For more, see Cal Newport, Deep Work (Boston: Little, Brown, 2016). 

He always stopped journaling before it seemed like a hassle: Greg McKeown, Essentialism: The Disciplined Pursuit of Less (New York: Crown, 2014), 78. 

habit shaping: Gail B. Peterson, “A Day of Great Illumination: B. F. Skinner’s Discovery of Shaping,” Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior 82, no. 3 (2004), doi:10.1901/jeab.2004.82-317. 





CHAPTER 14 


he remained in his study and wrote furiously: Adéle Hugo and Charles E. Wilbour, Victor Hugo, by a Witness of His Life (New York: Carleton, 1864). 

A commitment device is a choice you make in the present: Gharad Bryan, Dean Karlan, and Scott Nelson, “Commitment Devices,” Annual Review of Economics 2, no. 1 (2010), 
doi:10.1146/annurev.economics.102308.124324. 

outlet timer cuts off the power to the router: “Nir Eyal: Addictive Tech, Killing Bad Habits &amp; Apps for Life Hacking—#260,” interview by Dave Asprey, Bulletproof, November 13, 2015, 
https://blog.bulletproof.com/nir-eyal-life-hacking-260/. 

This is also referred to as a “Ulysses pact”: Peter Ubel, “The Ulysses Strategy,” The New Yorker, December 11, 2014, https://www.newyorker.com/business/currency/ulysses-strategy-self-control. 

Patterson’s business went from losing money to making $5,000 in profit: “John H. Patterson—Ringing Up Success with the Incorruptible Cashier,” Dayton Innovation Legacy, 
http://www.daytoninnovationlegacy.org/patterson.html, accessed June 8, 2016. 

onetime actions that lead to better long-term habits: James Clear (@james_clear), “What are onetime actions that pay off again and again in the future?” Twitter, February 11, 2018, 
https://twitter.com/james_clear/status/962694722702790659 

“Civilization advances by extending the number of operations”: Alfred North Whitehead, Introduction to Mathematics (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1911), 166. 

The average person spends over two hours per day on social media: “GWI Social,” GlobalWebIndex, 2017, Q3, 
https://cdn2. hubspot.net/hubfs/304927/Downloads/GW1%20Social%20Summary%20Q3%202017.pdf. 









































CHAPTER 15 


over nine million people called it home: “Population Size and Growth of Major Cities, 1998 Census,” Population Census Organization, 
http://www. pbs.gov.pk/sites/default/files//tables/POPULATION%20SIZE%20AND%20GROWTH%200F%20MAJOR%20CITIES.pdf. 

Over 60 percent of Karachi’s residents: Sabiah Askari, Studies on Karachi: Papers Presented at the Karachi Conference 2013 (Newcastle upon Tyne, UK: Cambridge Scholars, 2015). 

It was this public health crisis that had brought Stephen Luby to Pakistan: Atul Gawande, The Checklist Manifesto: How to Get Things Right (Gurgaon, India: Penguin Random House, 2014). 

“In Pakistan, Safeguard was a premium soap”: All quotes in this section are from an email conversation with Stephen Luby on May 28, 2018. 

The rate of diarrhea fell by 52 percent: Stephen P. Luby et al., “Effect of Handwashing on Child Health: A Randomised Controlled Trial,” Lancet 366, no. 9481 (2005), doi:10.1016/s0140— 
6736(05)66912-7. 

“Over 95 percent of households”: Anna Bowen, Mubina Agboatwalla, Tracy Ayers, Timothy Tobery, Maria Tariq, and Stephen P. Luby. “Sustained improvements in handwashing indicators more than 
5 years after a cluster-randomised, community-based trial of handwashing promotion in Karachi, Pakistan,” Tropical Medicine &amp; International Health 18, no. 3 (2013): 259-267. 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4626884/ 

Chewing gum had been sold commercially throughout the 1800s: Mary Bellis, “How We Have Bubble Gum Today,” ThoughtCo, October 16, 2017, https://www.thoughtco.com/history-of-bubble- 
and-chewing-gum-1991856. 

Wrigley revolutionized the industry: Jennifer P. Mathews, Chicle: The Chewing Gum of the Americas, from the Ancient Maya to William Wrigley (Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 2009), 44—46. 

Wrigley became the largest chewing gum company: “William Wrigley, Jr.,” Encyclopedia Britannica, https://www.britannica.com/biography/William-Wrigley-Jr, accessed June 8, 2018. 

Toothpaste had a similar trajectory: Charles Duhigg, The Power of Habit: Why We Do What We Do in Life and Business (New York: Random House, 2014), chap. 2. 

he started avoiding her: Sparkly_alpaca, “What Are the Coolest Psychology Tricks That You Know or Have Used?” Reddit, November 11, 2016, 
https://www.reddit.com/r/AskReddit/comments/Scgqbj/what_are_the_coolest_psychology_tricks_that_you/d9wcgsr/. 

The earliest remains of modern humans: Jan Mcdougall, Francis H. Brown, and John G. Fleagle, “Stratigraphic Placement and Age of Modern Humans from Kibish, Ethiopia,” Nature 433, no. 7027 
(2005), doi:10.1038/nature03258. 

the neocortex . . . was roughly the same: Some research indicates that the size of the human brain reached modern proportions around three hundred thousand years ago. Evolution never stops, of 
course, and the shape of the structure appears to have continued to evolve in meaningful ways until it reached both modern size and shape sometime between one hundred thousand and 
thirty-five thousand years ago. Simon Neubauer, Jean-Jacques Hublin, and Philipp Gunz, “The Evolution of Modern Human Brain Shape,” Science Advances 4, no. 1 (2018): eaao5961. 

society has shifted to a predominantly delayed-return environment: The original research on this topic used the terms delayed-return societies and immediate-return societies. James Woodburn, 
“Egalitarian Societies,” Man 17, no. 3 (1982), doi:10.2307/2801707. I first heard of the difference between immediate-return environments and delayed-return environments in a lecture 
from Mark Leary. Mark Leary, Understanding the Mysteries of Human Behavior (Chantilly, VA: Teaching, 2012). 

The world has changed much in recent years: The rapid environmental changes of recent centuries have far outpaced our biological ability to adapt. On average, it takes about twenty-five thousand 
years for meaningful genetic changes to be selected for in a human population. For more, see Edward O. Wilson, Sociobiology (Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press, 1980), 151. 

our brains evolved to prefer quick payoffs to long-term ones: Daniel Gilbert, “Humans Wired to Respond to Short-Term Problems,” interview by Neal Conan, Talk of the Nation, NPR, July 3, 2006, 
https://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=5530483. 

Disease and infection won’t show up for days or weeks, even years: The topics of irrational behavior and cognitive biases have become quite popular in recent years. However, many actions that seem 
irrational on the whole have rational origins if you consider their immediate outcome. 

Frédéric Bastiat: Frédéric Bastiat and W. B. Hodgson, What Is Seen and What Is Not Seen: Or Political Economy in One Lesson (London: Smith, 1859). 

Future You: Hat tip to behavioral economist Daniel Goldstein, who said, “It’s an unequal battle between the present self and the future self. I mean, let’s face it, the present self is present. It’s in control. 
It’s in power right now. It has these strong, heroic arms that can lift doughnuts into your mouth. And the future self is not even around. It’s off in the future. It’s weak. It doesn’t even have 
a lawyer present. There’s nobody to stick up for the future self. And so the present self can trounce all over its dreams.” For more, see Daniel Goldstein, “The Battle between Your Present 
and Future Self,” TEDSalon NY2011, November 2011, video, https://www.ted.com/talks/daniel_goldstein_the_battle_between_your_present_and_future_self. 

People who are better at delaying gratification have higher SAT scores: Walter Mischel, Ebbe B. Ebbesen, and Antonette Raskoff Zeiss, “Cognitive and Attentional Mechanisms in Delay of 
Gratification,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 21, no. 2 (1972), doi:10.1037/h0032198; W. Mischel, Y. Shoda, and M. Rodriguez, “Delay of Gratification in Children,” 
Science 244, no. 4907 (1989), doi:10.1126/science.2658056; Walter Mischel, Yuichi Shoda, and Philip K. Peake, “The Nature of Adolescent Competencies Predicted by Preschool Delay 
of Gratification,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 54, no. 4 (1988), doi:10.1037//0022-3514.54.4.687; Yuichi Shoda, Walter Mischel, and Philip K. Peake, “Predicting 
Adolescent Cognitive and Self-Regulatory Competencies from Preschool Delay of Gratification: Identifying Diagnostic Conditions,” Developmental Psychology 26, no. 6 (1990), 
doi:10.1037//0012—1649.26.6.978. 






















































































CHAPTER 16 


“I would start with 120 paper clips in one jar”: Trent Dyrsmid, email to author, April 1, 2015. 

Benjamin Franklin: Benjamin Franklin and Frank Woodworth Pine, Autobiography of Benjamin Franklin (New York: Holt, 1916), 148. 

Don’t break the chain of creating every day: Shoutout to my friend Nathan Barry, who originally inspired me with the mantra, “Create Every Day.” 

people who track their progress on goals like losing weight: Benjamin Harkin et al., “Does Monitoring Goal Progress Promote Goal Attainment? A Meta-analysis of the Experimental Evidence,” 
Psychological Bulletin 142, no. 2 (2016), doi:10.1037/bul0000025. 

those who kept a daily food log lost twice as much weight as those who did not: Miranda Hitti, “Keeping Food Diary Helps Lose Weight,” WebMD, July 8, 2008, 
http://www.webmd.com/diet/news/20080708/keeping-food-diary-helps-lose-weight; Kaiser Permanente, “Keeping a Food Diary Doubles Diet Weight Loss, Study Suggests,” Science 
Daily, July 8, 2008, https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2008/07/080708080738.htm; Jack F. Hollis et al., “Weight Loss during the Intensive Intervention Phase of the Weight-Loss 
Maintenance Trial,” American Journal of Preventive Medicine 35, no. 2 (2008), doi:10.1016/j.amepre.2008.04.013; Lora E. Burke, Jing Wang, and Mary Ann Sevick, “Self-Monitoring in 
Weight Loss: A Systematic Review of the Literature,” Journal of the American Dietetic Association 111, no. 1 (2011), doi:10.1016/j.jada.2010.10.008. 

The most effective form of motivation is progress: This line is paraphrased from Greg McKeown, who wrote, “Research has shown that of all forms of human motivation the most effective one is 
progress.” Greg McKeown, Essentialism: The Disciplined Pursuit of Less (Currency, 2014). 

The first mistake is never the one that ruins you: In fact, research has shown that missing a habit once has virtually no impact on the odds of developing a habit over the long-term, regardless of when 
the mistake occurs. As long as you get back on track, you’re fine. See: Phillippa Lally et al., “How Are Habits Formed: Modelling Habit Formation in the Real World,” European Journal 
of Social Psychology 40, no. 6 (2009), doi:10.1002/ejsp.674. 

Missing once is an accident: “Missing once is an accident. Missing twice is the start of a new habit.” I swear I read this line somewhere or perhaps paraphrased it from something similar, but despite my 
best efforts all of my searches for a source are coming up empty. Maybe I came up with it, but my best guess is it belongs to an unidentified genius instead. 

“When a measure becomes a target”: This definition of Goodhart’s Law was actually formulated by the British anthropologist Marilyn Strathern. “‘Improving Ratings’: Audit in the British University 
System,” European Review 5 (1997): 305-321, https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/european-review/article/improving-ratings-audit-in-the-british-university- 
system/FC2EE640C0C44E3DB87C29FB666E9AAB. Goodhart himself reportedly advanced the idea sometime around 1975 and put it formally into writing in 1981. Charles Goodhart, 
“Problems of Monetary Management: The U.K. Experience,” in Anthony S. Courakis (ed.), Inflation, Depression, and Economic Policy in the West (London: Rowman and Littlefield, 
1981), 111-146. 



































CHAPTER 17 


“When I suggested this to friends in the Pentagon”: Roger Fisher, “Preventing Nuclear War,” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 37, no. 3 (1981), doi:10.1080/00963402.1981.11458828. 

The first seat belt law: Michael Goryl and Michael Cynecki, “Restraint System Usage in the Traffic Population,” Journal of Safety Research 17, no. 2 (1986), doi:10.1016/0022—4375(86)90107-6. 

wearing a seat belt is enforceable by law: New Hampshire is the lone exception, where seat belts are only required for children. “New Hampshire,” Governors Highway Safety Association, 
https://www.ghsa.org/state-laws/states/new%20hampshire, accessed June 8, 2016. 

over 88 percent of Americans buckled up: “Seat Belt Use in U.S. Reaches Historic 90 Percent,” National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, November 21, 2016, https://www.nhtsa.gov/press- 
releases/seat-belt-use-us-reaches-historic-90-percent. 

Bryan Harris: Bryan Harris, email conversation with author, October 24, 2017. 

She does the “song a day” challenge: Courtney Shea, “Comedian Margaret Cho’s Tips for Success: If You’re Funny, Don’t Do Comedy,” Globe and Mail, July 1, 2013, 
https://www.theglobeandmail.com/life/comedian-margaret-chos-tips-for-success-if-youre-funny-dont-do-comedy/article12902304/?service=mobile. 

Thomas Frank, an entrepreneur in Boulder, Colorado: Thomas Frank, “How Buffer Forces Me to Wake Up at 5:55 AM Every Day,” College Info Geek, July 2, 2014, 
https://collegeinfogeek.com/early-waking-with-buffer/. 





























CHAPTER 18 


Phelps has won more Olympic medals: “Michael Phelps Biography,” Biography, https://www.biography.com/people/michael-phelps-345192, last modified March 29, 2018. 

El Guerrouj: Doug Gillan, “El Guerrouj: The Greatest of All Time,” IAFF, November 15, 2004, https://www.iaaf.org/news/news/el-guerrouj-the-greatest-of-all-time. 

they differ significantly in height: Heights and weights for Michael Phelps and Hicham El Guerrouj were pulled from their athlete profiles during the 2008 Summer Olympics. “Michael Phelps,” ESPN, 
2008, http://www.espn.com/olympics/summer08/fanguide/athlete?athlete=295471; “Hicham El Guerrouj,” ESPN, 2008, http://www.espn.com/oly/summer08/fanguide/athlete? 
athlete=29886. 

same length inseam on their pants: David Epstein, The Sports Gene: Inside the Science of Extraordinary Athletic Performance (St. Louis, MO: Turtleback Books, 2014). 

average height of Olympic gold medalists in the men’s 1,500-meter run: Alex Hutchinson, “The Incredible Shrinking Marathoner,” Runner’s World, November 12, 2013, 
https://www.runnersworld.com/sweat-science/the-incredible-shrinking-marathoner. 

average height of Olympic gold medalists in the men’s 100-meter: Alvin Chang, “Want to Win Olympic Gold? Here’s How Tall You Should Be for Archery, Swimming, and More,” Vox, August 9, 
2016, http://www.vox.com/2016/8/9/12387684/olympic-heights. 

“Genes can predispose, but they don’t predetermine”: Gabor Maté, “Dr. Gabor Maté—New Paradigms, Ayahuasca, and Redefining Addiction,” The Tim Ferriss Show, February 20, 2018, 
https://tim.blog/2018/02/20/gabor-mate/. 

Genes have been shown to influence everything: “All traits are heritable” is a bit of an exaggeration, but not by much. Concrete behavioral traits that patently depend on content provided by the home 
or culture are, of course, not heritable at all; which language you speak, which religion you worship in, which political party you belong to. But behavioral traits that reflect the underlying 
talents and temperaments are heritable: how proficient with language you are, how religious, how liberal or conservative. General intelligence is heritable, and so are the five major ways in 
which personality can vary . . . openness to experience, conscientiousness, extroversion-introversion, antagonism-agreeableness, and neuroticism. And traits that are surprisingly specific 
turn out to be heritable, too, such as dependence on nicotine or alcohol, number of hours of television watched, and likelihood of divorcing. Thomas J. Bouchard, “Genetic Influence on 
Human Psychological Traits,” Current Directions in Psychological Science 13, no. 4 (2004), doi:10.1111/j.0963—7214.2004.00295.x; Robert Plomin, Nature and Nurture: An Introduction 
to Human Behavioral Genetics (Stamford, CT: Wadsworth, 1996); Robert Plomin, “Why We’re Different,” Edge, June 29, 2016, https://soundcloud.com/edgefoundationinc/edge2016- 
robert-plomin. 

Theres a strong genetic component: Daniel Goleman, “Major Personality Study Finds That Traits Are Mostly Inherited,” New York Times, December 2, 1986, 
http://www.nytimes.com/1986/12/02/science/major-personality-study-finds-that-traits-are-mostly-inheri
ted.html?pagewanted=all. 

Robert Plomin: Robert Plomin, phone call with the author, August 9, 2016. 

more likely to become introverts: Jerome Kagan et al., “Reactivity in Infants: A Cross-National Comparison,” Developmental Psychology 30, no. 3 (1994), doi:10.1037//0012—1649.30.3.342; Michael 
V. Ellis and Erica S. Robbins, “In Celebration of Nature: A Dialogue with Jerome Kagan,” Journal of Counseling and Development 68, no. 6 (1990), doi:10.1002/j.1556— 
6676.1990.tb01426.x; Brian R. Little, Me, Myself, and Us: The Science of Personality and the Art of Well-Being (New York: Public Affairs, 2016); Susan Cain, Quiet: The Power of 
Introverts in a World That Can’t Stop Talking (London: Penguin, 2013), 99-100. 

People who are high in agreeableness: W. G. Graziano and R. M. Tobin, “The Cognitive and Motivational Foundations Underlying Agreeableness,” in M. D. Robinson, E. Watkins, and E. Harmon- 
Jones, eds., Handbook of Cognition and Emotion (New York: Guilford, 2013), 347-364. 

They also tend to have higher natural oxytocin levels: Mitsuhiro Matsuzaki et al., “Oxytocin: A Therapeutic Target for Mental Disorders,” Journal of Physiological Sciences 62, no. 6 (2012), 
doi:10.1007/s12576-012-0232-9; Angeliki Theodoridou et al., “Oxytocin and Social Perception: Oxytocin Increases Perceived Facial Trustworthiness and Attractiveness,” Hormones and 
Behavior 56, no. 1 (2009), doi:10.1016/j.yhbeh.2009.03.019; Anthony Lane et al., “Oxytocin Increases Willingness to Socially Share One’s Emotions,” International Journal of 
Psychology 48, no. 4 (2013), doi:10.1080/00207594.2012.677540; Christopher Cardoso et al., “Stress-Induced Negative Mood Moderates the Relation between Oxytocin Administration 
and Trust: Evidence for the Tend-and-Befriend Response to Stress?” Psychoneuroendocrinology 38, no. 11 (2013), doi:10.1016/j.psyneuen.2013.05.006. 

hypersensitivity of the amygdala: J. Ormel, A. Bastiaansen, H. Riese, E. H. Bos, M. Servaas, M. Ellenbogen, J. G. Rosmalen, and A. Aleman, “The Biological and Psychological Basis of Neuroticism: 
Current Status and Future Directions,” Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 37, no. 1 (2013), doi:10.1016/j.neu biorev.2012.09.004. PMID 23068306; R. A. Depue and Y. Fu, 
“Neurogenetic and Experiential Processes Underlying Major Personality Traits: Implications for Modelling Personality Disorders,” International Review of Psychiatry 23, no. 3 (2011), 
doi:10.3109/09540261.2011.599315. 

Our deeply rooted preferences make certain behaviors easier: “For example, all people have brain systems that respond to rewards, but in different individuals these systems will respond with 
different degrees of vigor to a particular reward, and the systems’ average level of response may be associated with some personality trait.” For more, see Colin G. Deyoung, “Personality 
Neuroscience and the Biology of Traits,” Social and Personality Psychology Compass 4, no. 12 (2010), doi:10.1111/j.1751-9004.2010.00327.x. 

If your friend follows a low-carb diet: Research conducted in major randomized clinical trials shows no difference in low-carb versus low-fat diets for weight loss. As with many habits, there are many 
ways to the same destination if you stick with it. For more, see Christopher D. Gardner et al., “Effect of Low-Fat vs Low-Carbohydrate Diet on 12-Month Weight Loss in Overweight 
Adults and the Association with Genotype Pattern or Insulin Secretion,” Journal of the American Medical Association 319, no. 7 (2018), doi:10.1001/jama.2018.0245. 

explore/exploit trade-off: M. A. Addicott et al., “A Primer on Foraging and the Explore/Exploit Trade-Off for Psychiatry Research,” Neuropsychopharmacology 42, no. 10 (2017), 
doi:10.1038/npp.2017.108. 

Google famously asks employees: Bharat Mediratta and Julie Bick, “The Google Way: Give Engineers Room,” New York Times, October 21, 2007, 
https://www.nytimes.com/2007/10/21/jobs/21pre.html. 

“Flow is the mental state”: Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, Finding Flow: The Psychology of Engagement with Everyday Life (New York: Basic Books, 2008). 

“Everyone has at least a few areas”: Scott Adams, “Career Advice,” Dilbert Blog, July 20, 2007, http://dilbertblog.typepad.com/the_dilbert_blog/2007/07/career-advice.html. 






















































































CHAPTER 19 


most successful comedians: Steve Martin, Born Standing Up: A Comic’s Life (Leicester, UK: Charnwood, 2008). 

“4 years as a wild success”: Steve Martin, Born Standing Up: A Comic’s Life (Leicester, UK: Charnwood, 2008), 1. 

“just manageable difficulty”: Nicholas Hobbs, “The Psychologist as Administrator,” Journal of Clinical Psychology 15, no. 3 (1959), doi:10.1002/1097-4679(195907)15:33.0.co; 2—4; Gilbert Brim, 
Ambition: How We Manage Success and Failure Throughout Our Lives (Lincoln, NE: IUniverse.com, 2000); Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, Finding Flow: The Psychology of Engagement with 
Everyday Life (New York: Basic Books, 2008). 

In psychology research this is known as the Yerkes-Dodson law: Robert Yerkes and John Dodson, “The Relation of Strength of Stimulus to Rapidity of Habit Formation,” Journal of Comparative 
Neurology and Psychology 18 (1908): 459-482. 

4 percent beyond your current ability: Steven Kotler, The Rise of Superman: Decoding the Science of Ultimate Human Performance (Boston: New Harvest, 2014). In his book, Kotler cites: “Chip 
Conley, AI, September 2013. The real ratio, according to calculations performed by [Mihaly] Csikszentmihalyi, is 1:96.” 

“Men desire novelty to such an extent”: Niccolò Machiavelli, Peter Bondanella, and Mark Musa, The Portable Machiavelli (London: Penguin, 2005). 

variable reward: C. B. Ferster and B. F. Skinner, “Schedules of Reinforcement,” 1957, doi:10.1037/10627-000. For more, see B. F. Skinner, “A Case History in Scientific Method,” American 
Psychologist 11, no. 5 (1956): 226, doi:10.1037/h0047662. 

This variance leads to the greatest spike of dopamine: Matching Law shows that the rate of the reward schedule impacts behavior: “Matching Law,” Wikipedia, 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Matching_law. 

















CHAPTER 20 


there is usually a slight decline in performance: K. Anders Ericsson and Robert Pool, Peak: Secrets from the New Science of Expertise (Boston: Mariner Books, 2017), 13. 

“The pundits were saying”: Pat Riley and Byron Laursen, “Temporary Insanity and Other Management Techniques: The Los Angeles Lakers’ Coach Tells All,” Los Angeles Times Magazine, April 19, 
1987, http://articles.latimes.com/1987—04—19/magazine/tm-1669_1_lakers. 

a system that he called the Career Best Effort program or CBE: MacMullan’s book claims that Riley began his CBE program during the 1984-1985 NBA season. My research shows that the Lakers 
began tracking statistics of individual players at that time, but the CBE program as it is described here was first used in 1986-1987. 

If they succeeded, it would be a CBE: Larry Bird, Earvin Johnson, and Jackie MacMullan, When the Game Was Ours (Boston: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2010). 

“Sustaining an effort”: Pat Riley and Byron Laursen, “Temporary Insanity and Other Management Techniques: The Los Angeles Lakers’ Coach Tells All,” Los Angeles Times Magazine, April 19, 
1987, http://articles.latimes.com/1987—04—19/magazine/tm-1669_1_lakers. 

Eliud Kipchoge: Cathal Dennehy, “The Simple Life of One of the World’s Best Marathoners,” Runner’s World, April 19, 2016, https://www.runnersworld.com/elite-runners/the-simple-life-of-one-of- 
the-worlds-best-marathoners. “Eliud Kipchoge: Full Training Log Leading Up to Marathon World Record Attempt,” Sweat Elite, 2017, http://www.sweatelite.co/eliud-kipchoge-full- 
training-log-leading-marathon-world-record-attempt/. 

her coach goes over her notes and adds his thoughts: Yuri Suguiyama, “Training Katie Ledecky,” American Swimming Coaches Association, November 30, 2016, 
https://swimmingcoach.org/training-katie-ledecky-by-yuri-suguiyama-curl-burke-swim-club-2012/. 

When comedian Chris Rock is preparing fresh material: Peter Sims, “Innovate Like Chris Rock,” Harvard Business Review, January 26, 2009, https://hbr.org/2009/01/innovate-like-chris-rock. 

Annual Review: I'd like to thank Chris Guillebeau, who inspired me to start my own annual review process by publicly sharing his annual review each year at https://chrisguillebeau.com. 

“keep your identity small”; Paul Graham, “Keep Your Identity Small,” February 2009, http://www.paulgraham.com/identity.html. 









































CONCLUSION 


No one can be rich unless one coin can make him or her so: Desiderius Erasmus and Van Loon Hendrik Willem, The Praise of Folly (New York: Black, 1942), 31. Hat tip to Gretchen Rubin. I first 
read about this parable in her book, Better Than Before, and then tracked down the origin story. For more, see Gretchen Rubin, Better Than Before (New York: Hodder, 2016). 





LITTLE LESSONS FROM THE FOUR LAWS 


“Happiness is the space between one desire”: Caed (@caedbudris), “Happiness is the space between desire being fulfilled and a new desire forming,” Twitter, November 10, 2017, 
https://twitter.com/caedbudris/status/929042389930594304. 

happiness cannot be pursued, it must ensue: Frankl’s full quotation is as follows: “Don’t aim at success. The more you aim at it and make it a target, the more you are going to miss it. For success, like 
happiness, cannot be pursued; it must ensue, and it only does so as the unintended side effect of one’s personal dedication to a cause greater than oneself or as the by-product of one’s 
surrender to a person other than oneself.” For more, see Viktor E. Frankl, Man’s Search for Meaning: An Introduction to Logotherapy (Boston: Beacon Press, 1962). 

“He who has a why to live for can bear almost any how”: Friedrich Nietzsche and Oscar Levy, The Twilight of the Idols (Edinburgh: Foulis, 1909). 

The feeling comes first (System 1): Daniel Kahneman, Thinking, Fast and Slow (New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2015). 

appealing to emotion is typically more powerful than appealing to reason: “If you wish to persuade, appeal to interest, rather than reason” (Benjamin Franklin). 

Satisfaction = Liking - Wanting: This is similar to David Meister’s fifth law of service businesses: Satisfaction = perception — expectation. 

“Being poor is not having too little, it is wanting more”: Lucius Annaeus Seneca and Anna Lydia Motto, Moral Epistles (Chico, CA: Scholars Press, 1985). 

As Aristotle noted: It is debated whether Aristotle actually said this. The quote has been attributed to him for centuries, but I could find no primary source for the phrase. 


























Index 


The page numbers in this index refer to the printed version of this book. The link provided will take you to the beginning of that print page. You may need to scroll forward from that location to find the 
corresponding reference on your e-reader. 


accepting that you have particular abilities, 218-19 
accountability, 209-10 
action vs. motion, 142-43 
Adams, Scott, 23, 225 
addiction 
effect of environment on readdiction, 92 
smoking, 125-26 
Vietnam War heroin problem, 91-92 
addition by subtraction strategy, 154 
“the aggregation of marginal gains,” 13-14 
agricultural expansion example of doing that which requires the least effort, 149-51 
Allen Carr’s Easy Way to Stop Smoking (Carr), 125-26 
amateurs vs. professionals, 236 
animal behavior 
within an immediate-return environment, 187 
cat escape study, 43-44 
greylag geese and supernormal stimuli, 102 
herring gulls and supernormal stimuli, 101—102 
methods for sensing and understanding the world, 84 
Art &amp; Fear (Bayles and Orland), 142n 
Asch, Solomon, 118-20 
athletes 
Career Best Effort program (CBE), 242-44 
comparing champions of different sports, 217-18 
examples of reflection and review, 244-45 
handling the boredom of training, 233-34 
Los Angeles Lakers example of reflection and review, 242-44 
use of motivation rituals, 132-33 
atomic habits 
cumulative effect of stacking, 251-52 
defined, 27 
automaticity, 144-46 
automating a habit 
cash register example, 171-72 
table of onetime actions that lock in good habits, 173 
Thomas Frank example of automating a habit contract, 210 
using technology, 173-75 
awareness 
Habits Scorecard, 64-66 
of nonconscious habits, 62 
Pointing-and-Calling subway safety system, 62-63 


bad habits 
breaking (table), 97, 137, 179, 213 
reducing exposure to the cues that cause them, 94-95 
behavior change 
Cardinal Rule of Behavior Change, 186, 189 
four laws of, 53-55, 186, 252-53 (see also specific numbered laws) 
learning curves, 145-46 
three layers of, 29-31 
benefits of habits, 46—47, 239 
“Better All the Time” (article), 154 
biological considerations 
“Big Five” personality traits, 220-22 
genes, 218-21, 226-27 
boredom, 233-36 
Brailsford, Dave, 13-14 
the brain 
career choices and brain differences, 143-44 
dopamine-driven feedback loops, 105-108 
evolutionary similarity of, 187 
as habits are created, 45-46 
Hebb’s Law, 143 
inaccurate perceptions of threats, 189n 


long-term potentiation, 143 
physical changes in the brain due to repetition, 143-44 
System 1 vs. System 2 thinking, 232n, 261 
“wanting” vs. “liking” rewards, 106-108, 263 
breakthrough moments 
ice cube melting example, 20-21 
British Cycling, 13-15, 25, 243 
Budris, Caed, 260 
building a habit 
four-step process 
1. cue, 47-48 
2. craving, 48 
3. response, 48—49 
4. reward, 49 
problem phase and solution phase, 51-53 
lessons from, 259-64 
business applications of habit strategies, 265 
Byrne, Ronan, 108-109 


cash register example of automating a habit, 171-72 
cat escape study, 43-44 
changing your mind-set from “have to” to “get to,” 130-31 
Cho, Margaret, 210 
choosing the right opportunities 
combining your skills to reduce the competition, 225-26 
explore/exploit trade-off, 223-25 
importance of, 222-23 
specialization, 226 
Clark, Brian, 33 
commitment devices, 170-71 
compounding effect of small changes 
airplane route example, 17 
author’s college experiences, 6-7 
negative results, 19 
1 percent changes, 15-16, 17-18 
positive results, 19 
conditioning, 132-33 
consequences of good and bad habits, 188-90, 206-207 
context, 87-90 
cravings 
as the sense that something is missing, 129 
timing of, 259, 263-64 
and underlying motives, 127-28, 130 
cue-induced wanting, 93-94 


cues 
automatically picking up, 59-62 
making predictions after perceiving, 128-29 
obvious visual cues, 85-87 
as part of the four-step process of building a habit, 47-48 
selecting cues for habit stacking, 77-79 

culture 


imitation of community habits and standards, 115-18 

Nerd Fitness example of similarity within a group, 117-18 

Polgar family chess example of the role of, 113-14, 122 
curiosity, 261 


Damasio, Antonio, 130 
Darwin, Charles, 115 
decision journal, 245 
decisive moments, 160-62 
desire, 129-30, 263-64 
Diderot, Denis, 72-73 

Diderot Effect, 73 
“don’t break the chain,” 196-97 
dopamine-driven feedback loops, 105-108 
downside of habits, 239-40 
Dyrsmid, Trent, 195 


emotions, 129-30, 261-62, 263-64 
energy and likelihood of action, 151-52 
environment 
and context, 87-90 
creating an environment where doing the right thing is as easy as possible, 155 
dedicated spaces for different activities, 87-90 
delayed-return, 187-90 
Dutch electrical meter example of obvious cues, 85 
effect of environment on an addiction, 92 
immediate-return, 187-90 
Lewin’s Equation for human behavior, 83 
Massachusetts General Hospital cafeteria example of design change, 81-82 


priming your environment, 156-58 
redesigning your environment, 86-87 
suggestion impulse buying, 83 
Vietnam War heroin addiction problem example, 91-92 
exercise study of implementation intention, 69-70 
expectations, 262-63, 264 
explore/exploit trade-off, 223-25 
Eyal, Nir, 170 


failure, 263 
feedback loops 
in all human behavior, 45 
dopamine-driven, 105-108 
formation of all habits that shape one’s identity, 40 
habit, 49-51 
feelings, 129-30, 261-62, 263-64 
1st Law of Behavior Change (Make It Obvious) 
Habits Scorecard, 64-66 
habit stacking, 74-79, 110-11 
habit tracking, 197 
implementation intention, 69-72 
making the cues of bad habits invisible, 94-95 
Fisher, Roger, 205-206 
flow state, 224, 232-33 
Fogg, BJ, 72, 74 
food science 
“bliss point” for each product, 103, 
cravings for junk food, 102-103 
dynamic contrast of processed foods, 103 
orosensation, 103 
four laws of behavior change, 53-55, 186, 252-53. See also specific numbered laws 
four-step process of building a habit 
1. cue, 47-48 
2. craving, 48 
3. response, 48—49 
4. reward, 49 
habit loop, 49-51 
lessons from, 259-64 
problem phase and solution phase, 51-53 
4th Law of Behavior Change (Make It Satisfying) 
habit contract, 207-10 
habit tracking, 198-99 
instant gratification, 188-93 
making the cues of bad habits unsatisfying, 205-206 
Safeguard soap in Pakistan example, 184-85 
Frankl, Victor, 260 
Franklin, Benjamin, 196 
frequency’s effect on habits, 145-47 
friction 
associated with a behavior, 152-58 
garden hose example of reducing, 153 
Japanese factory example of eliminating wasted time and effort, 154-55 
to prevent unwanted behavior, 157-58 


“gateway habit,” 163 
genes, 218-21, 226-27 
goals 
effect on happiness, 26 
fleeting nature of, 25 
shared by winners and losers, 24-25 
short-term effects of, 26-27 
vs. systems, 23-24 
the Goldilocks Rule 
flow state, 224, 232-33 
the Goldilocks Zone, 232 
tennis example, 231 
good habits 
creating (table), 96, 136, 178, 212 
Two-Minute Rule, 162-67 
Goodhart, Charles, 203 
Goodhart’s Law, 203 
Graham, Paul, 247-48 
greylag geese and supernormal stimuli, 102 
Guerrouj, Hicham El, 217-18, 225 
Guns, Germs, and Steel (Diamond), 149-51 


habit contract 
Bryan Harris weight loss example, 208-209 
defined, 208 
seat belt law example, 207-208 


Thomas Frank alarm example, 210 
habit line, 145-47 
habit loop, 49-51 
habits 
of avoidance, 191-92 
benefits of, 46—47, 239 
breaking bad habits (table), 97, 137, 179, 213 
in the business world, 265 
changing your mind-set about, 130-31 
creating good habits (table), 96, 136, 178, 212 
downside of, 239-40 
effect on the rest of your day, 160, 162 
eliminating bad habits, 94-95 
as the embodiment of identity, 36-38 
formation of, 44—46, 145-47 
four-step process of building a habit, 47-53, 259-64 
“gateway habit,” 163 
identity-based, 31, 39-40 
imitation of others’ habits 
the close, 116-18 
the many, 118-21 
the powerful, 121-22 
importance of, 40-41 
outcome-based, 31 
and parenting, 267 
reframing habits to highlight their benefits, 131-32 
short-term and long-term consequences of, 188-90 
sticking with, 230-31 
suitability for your personality, 221-22 
Two-Minute Rule, 162-67 
using implementation intention to start, 71-72 
Habits Academy, 8 
habit shaping, 165-67 
Habits Scorecard, 64-66 
habit stacking 
combining temptation bundling with, 110-11 
explained, 74-79 
habit tracking, 196-200, 202-204 
handwashing in Pakistan example of a satisfying behavior change, 184-85 
happiness 
as the absence of desire, 259-60 
and goals, 26 
relativity of, 263 
Harris, Bryan, 208-209 
Hebb, Donald, 143 
Hebb’s Law, 143 
herring gulls and supernormal stimuli, 101—102 
hope, 264 
Hreha, Jason, 45 
Hugo, Victor, 169-70 
The Hunchback of Notre Dame (Hugo), 169-70 
hyperbolic discounting (time inconsistency), 188-89 


identity 
accepting blanket personal statements as facts, 35 
and behavior change, 29-32, 34-36 
behavior that is at odds with the self, 32-33 
habits as the embodiment of, 36-38, 247-49 
identity-based habits, 31, 39-40 
letting a single belief define you, 247-49 
pride in a particular aspect of one’s identity, 33-34 
reinforcing your desired identity by using the Two-Minute Rule, 165 
two-step process of changing your identity, 39-40 
implementation intention, 69-72 
improvements, making small, 231-32, 233, 253 
instant gratification, 188-93 


Johnson, Magic, 243-44 
journaling, 165 
Jung, Carl, 62 


Kamb, Steve, 117-18 
Kubitz, Andrew, 109 


Lao Tzu, 249 
Tao Te Ching, 249 
Latimore, Ed, 132 


Lewes, George H., 144 

long-term potentiation, 143 

Los Angeles Lakers example of reflection and review, 242-44 
Luby, Stephen, 183-85 


MacMullan, Jackie, 243-44 
Martin, Steve, 229-30, 231 
Massachusetts General Hospital cafeteria example of environment design change, 81-82 
Massimino, Mike, 117 
mastery, 240-42 
Mate, Gabor, 219 
McKeown, Greg, 165 
measurements 
usefulness of, 202-204 
visual, 195-96 
Mike (Turkish travel guide/ex-smoker), 125-26 
Milner, Peter, 105 
mind-set shifts 
from “have to” to “get to,” 130-31 
motivation rituals, 132-33 
reframing habits to highlight their benefits, 131-32 
motion vs. action, 142-43 
motivation 
the Goldilocks Rule, 231-33 
maximum motivation, 232 
rituals, 132-33 
and taking action, 260-61 
Murphy, Morgan, 91 


negative compounding, 19 
Nietzsche, Friedrich, 260 
nonconscious activities, 34n 
nonscale victories, 203-204 
novelty, 234 

Nuckols, Oswald, 156 


observations, 260 

obstacles to getting what you want, 152 

Olds, James, 105 

Olwell, Patty, 93 

1 percent changes 
Career Best Effort program (CBE), 242-44 
compounding effect of making changes, 15-16, 17-18 
Sorites Paradox, 251-52 

operant conditioning, 9-10 

opportunities, choosing the right 
combining your skills to reduce the competition, 225-26 
explore/exploit trade-off, 223-25 
importance of, 222-23 
specialization, 226 

outcomes 
and behavior change, 29-31 
outcome-based habits, 31 


pain, 206-207 
Paper Clip Strategy of visual progress measurements, 195-96 
parenting applications of habit strategies, 267 
Patterson, John Henry, 171-72 
Phelps, Michael, 217-18, 225 
photography class example of active practice, 141-42, 144 
Plateau of Latent Potential, 21-23 
pleasure 
anticipating vs. experiencing, 106-108 
image of, 260 
repeating a behavior when it’s a satisfying sensory experience, 184-86, 264 
Safeguard soap example, 184-85 
Plomin, Robert, 220 
Pointing-and-Calling subway safety system, 62-63 
positive compounding, 19 
The Power of Habit (Duhigg), 9, 47n 
predictions, making 
after perceiving cues, 128-29 
the human brain as a prediction machine, 60-61 
Premack, David, 110 
Premack’s Principle, 110. 
pride 
manicure example, 33 


in a particular aspect of one’s identity, 33-34 
priming your environment to make the next action easy, 156-58 
problem phase of a habit loop, 51-53 
process and behavior change, 30-31 
professionals vs. amateurs, 236 
progress, 262 
proximity’s effect on behavior, 116-18 


quitting smoking, 32, 125-26 


reading resources 
Atomic Habits newsletter, 257 
business applications of habit strategies, 265 
parenting applications of habit strategies, 267 
recovering when habits break down, 200-202 
reflection and review 
author’s Annual Review and Integrity Report, 245-46 
benefits of, 246-47 
Career Best Effort program (CBE) example, 242-44 
Chris Rock example, 245 
Eliud Kipchoge example, 244-45 
flexibility and adaptation, 247-49 
importance of, 244-45 
Katie Ledecky example, 245 
reframing habits to highlight their benefits, 131-32 
reinforcement, 191-93 
repetition 
as active practice of a new habit, 144 
automaticity, 144-46 
to master a habit, 143 
photography class example of active practice, 141-42, 144 
responding to things based on emotions, 261-62 
rewards 
after sacrifice, 262 
immediate vs. delayed, 187-90 
purpose of, 49 
reinforcement, 191-93 
training yourself to delay gratification, 190-93 
variable rewards, 235 
“wanting” vs. “liking,” 106-108, 263 
Riis, Jacob, 21 
Riley, Michael, 60 
Riley, Pat, 242-44 
Ritty, James, 171-72 
Robins, Lee, 91-92 


sacrifice, 262 
satisfaction 
as the completion of the habit loop, 186 
and expectations, 262-63 
pleasurable sensory experiences, 184-86 
2nd Law of Behavior Change (Make It Attractive) 
ABC Thursday night TV lineup example, 109 
desire for approval, respect, and praise, 121-22 
habit tracking, 198 
highly engineered versions of reality, 104 
making the cues of bad habits unattractive, 126 
supernormal stimuli, 102 
temptation bundling, 108-11 
Seinfeld, Jerry, 196-97 
self-control 
controlling the environment to achieve, 92-93 
cue-induced wanting, 93-94 
difficulty of, 262 
riding and smoking example of controlling your environment, 93 
as a short-term strategy, 95 
the senses 
Safeguard soap example, 184-85 
toothpaste example of a satisfying behavior change, 186 
vision, 84, 85-87 
Wrigley chewing gum example, 185 
showing up, mastering the art of, 163-64, 201-202, 236 
Skinner, B. F., 9-10, 235n 
smoking, quitting, 32, 125-26 
social media, 174-75 
social norms 
Asch’s social conformity line experiments, 118-20 
downside of going along with the group, 120-21 
herd mentality, 115 
imitation of others’ habits 


the close, 116-18 
the many, 118-21 
the powerful, 121-22 
solution phase of a habit loop, 51-53 
Sorites Paradox, 251-52 
starting a habit, 71-72 
Steele, Robert, 91 
Stern, Hawkins, 83 
success 
accepting where your strengths are, 218-19 
importance of feeling successful, 190 
suffering, 262 
suggestion impulse buying, 83 
supernormal stimuli, 102 
Suroweicki, James, 154 
System 1 vs. System 2 thinking, 232n, 261 


systems 
changes to solve problems, 25 
as a cycle of continuous improvement, 26-27 
vs. goals, 23-24 

technology 


for automating a habit, 173-75 
social media, 174-75 

temptation bundling, 108-11 

3rd Law of Behavior Change (Make It Easy) 
agricultural expansion example of using the least effort, 149-51 
energy requirements and likelihood of action, 151-52 
friction associated with a behavior, 152-58 
garden hose example of reducing friction, 153 
“gateway habit,” 163 
Japanese factory example of addition by subtraction, 154-55 
making the cues of bad habits difficult, 169-70 
onetime actions that lead to better habits, 172-74 
Principle of Least Action, 151n 
repetition as the key to habit formation, 146-47 
Two-Minute Rule, 162-67 
Twyla Tharp example of a daily ritual, 159-60 

Thorndike, Anne, 81-82 

Thorndike, Edward, 43-44 

time inconsistency, 188-89 

Tinbergen, Niko, 101-102 

toothpaste example of a satisfying behavior change, 186 

tracking a habit 
automated, 199 
combining habit stacking with habit tracking, 200 
manual, 199-200 
usefulness of, 202-204 

trajectory of your current path, 18 

two-step process of changing your identity, 39-40 


Uelsmann, Jerry, 141-42 
Ulysses pact (Ulysses contract), 170n 
underlying motives and cravings, 127-28, 130. 


Valley of Disappointment, 20, 22 
variable rewards, 235 
Vietnam War heroin addiction problem, 91-92 
vision 
impact on human behavior, 84 
obvious visual cues, 85-87 
visual measurements, 195-96 


weight loss 
nonscale victories, 203-204 
using a habit contract to ensure, 208-209 


Yerkes-Dodson law, 232 


About the Author 


James Clear's work has appeared in the New York Times, Time, and 
Entrepreneur, and on CBS This Morning, and is taught in colleges around the 
world. His website, jamesclear.com, receives millions of visitors each month, 
and hundreds of thousands subscribe to his email newsletter. He is the creator of 
The Habits Academy, the premier training platform for organizations and 
individuals that are interested in building better habits in life and work. 


Penguin 
Random House 
PENGUIN PUBLISHING GROUP 





What’s next on 
your reading list? 


Discover your next 
great read! 





Get personalized book picks and up-to-date news about this author. 


Sign up now. 


* Interested readers can learn more at habitsacademy.com. 


* As this book was going to print, new information about the British Cycling 
team has come out. You can see my thoughts at atomichabits.com/cycling. 


* T geeked out and actually calculated this. Washington, D.C., is about 225 miles 
from New York City. Assuming you are flying on a 747 or an Airbus A380, 
changing the heading by 3.5 degrees as you leave Los Angeles likely causes the 
nose of the airplane to shift between 7.2 to 7.6 feet, or about 86 to 92 inches. A 
very small shift in direction can lead to a very meaningful change in destination. 


* The terms unconscious, nonconscious, and subconscious can all be used to 
describe the absence of awareness or thought. Even in academic circles, these 
words are often used interchangeably without much nitpicking (for once). 
Nonconscious is the term I’m going to use because it is broad enough to 
encompass both the processes of the mind we could never consciously access 
and the moments when we are simply not paying attention to what surrounds us. 
Nonconscious is a description of anything you are not consciously thinking 
about. 


* Certainly, there are some aspects of your identity that tend to remain 
unchanged over time—like identifying as someone who is tall or short. But even 
for more fixed qualities and characteristics, whether you view them in a positive 
or negative light is determined by your experiences throughout life. 


* Readers of The Power of Habit by Charles Duhigg will recognize these terms. 
Duhigg wrote a great book and my intention is to pick up where he left off by 
integrating these stages into four simple laws you can apply to build better habits 
in life and work. 


* Charles Duhigg and Nir Eyal deserve special recognition for their influence on 
this image. This representation of the habit loop is a combination of language 
that was popularized by Duhigg’s book, The Power of Habit, and a design that 
was popularized by Eyal’s book, Hooked. 


* When I visited Japan, I saw this strategy save a woman’s life. Her young son 
stepped onto the Shinkansen, one of Japan’s famous bullet trains that travel at 
over two hundred miles per hour, just as the doors were closing. She was left 
outside on the platform and jammed her arm through the door to grab him. With 
her arm stuck in the door, the train was about to take off, but right before it 
pulled away an employee performed a safety check by Pointing-and-Calling up 
and down the platform. In less than five seconds, he noticed the woman and 
managed to stop the train from leaving. The door opened, the woman—now in 
tears—ran to her son, and a minute later the train departed safely. 


* Interested readers can get a template to create their own Habits Scorecard at 
atomichabits.com/scorecard. 


* In addition to her payment for the library, Catherine the Great asked Diderot to 
keep the books until she needed them and offered to pay him a yearly salary to 
act as her librarian. 


* Fogg refers to this strategy as the “Tiny Habits recipe,” but I'll call it the habit 
stacking formula throughout the book. 


* If you’re looking for more examples and guidance, you can download a Habit 


Stacking template at atomichabits.com/habitstacking. 


* Dopamine is not the only chemical that influences your habits. Every behavior 
involves multiple brain regions and neurochemicals, and anyone who claims that 
“habits are all about dopamine” is skipping over major portions of the process. It 
is just one of the important role players in habit formation. However, I will 
single out the dopamine circuit in this chapter because it provides a window into 
the biological underpinnings of desire, craving, and motivation that are behind 
every habit. 


* Pm so happy I was able to fit a Game of Thrones reference into this book. 


* This is just a partial list of underlying motives. I offer a more complete list and 
more examples of how to apply them to business at atomichabits.com/business. 


* A similar story is told in the book Art &amp; Fear by David Bayles and Ted 
Orland. It has been adapted here with permission. See the endnotes for a full 
explanation. 


* This is a foundational principle in physics, where it is known as the Principle 
of Least Action. It states that the path followed between any two points will 
always be the path requiring the least energy. This simple principle underpins 
the laws of the universe. From this one idea, you can describe the laws of motion 
and relativity. 


* The phrase addition by subtraction is also used by teams and businesses to 
describe removing people from a group in order to make the team stronger 
overall. 


* To be fair, this still sounds like an amazing night. 


* T designed a habit journal specifically to make journaling easier. It includes a 
“One Line Per Day” section where you simply write one sentence about your 
day. You can learn more at atomichabits.com/journal. 


* The irony of how closely this story matches my process of writing this book is 
not lost on me. Although my publisher was much more accommodating, and my 
closet remained full, I did feel like I had to place myself on house arrest to finish 
the manuscript. 


* This is also referred to as a “Ulysses pact” or a “Ulysses contract.” Named 
after Ulysses, the hero of The Odyssey, who told his sailors to tie him to the mast 
of the ship so that he could hear the enchanting song of the Sirens but wouldn’t 
be able to steer the ship toward them and crash on the rocks. Ulysses realized the 
benefits of locking in your future actions while your mind is in the right place 
rather than waiting to see where your desires take you in the moment. 


* The shift to a delayed-return environment likely began around the advent of 
agriculture ten thousand years ago when farmers began planting crops in 
anticipation of a harvest months later. However, it was not until recent centuries 
that our lives became filled with delayed-return choices: career planning, 
retirement planning, vacation planning, and everything else that occupies our 
calendars. 


* Time inconsistency is also referred to as hyperbolic discounting. 


* This can derail our decision making as well. The brain overestimates the 
danger of anything that seems like an immediate threat but has almost no 
likelihood of actually occurring: your plane crashing during a bit of turbulence, a 
burglar breaking in while you’re home alone, a terrorist blowing up the bus 
you’re on. Meanwhile, it underestimates what appears to be a distant threat but is 
actually very likely: the steady accumulation of fat from eating unhealthy food, 
the gradual decay of your muscles from sitting at a desk, the slow creep of 
clutter when you fail to tidy up. 


* Interested readers can find a _ habit tracker template at 
atomichabits.com/tracker. 


* You can see the actual Habit Contracts used by Bryan Harris and get a blank 
template at atomichabits.com/contract. 


* If you are interested in taking a personality test, you can find links to the most 
reliable tests here: atomichabits.com/personality. 


* Tf it’s Harry Potter on repeat, I feel you. 


* I have a pet theory about what happens when we achieve a flow state. This 
isn’t confirmed. It’s just my guess. Psychologists commonly refer to the brain as 
operating in two modes: System 1 and System 2. System 1 is fast and instinctual. 
Generally speaking, processes you can perform very quickly (like habits) are 
governed by System 1. Meanwhile, System 2 controls thinking processes that are 
more effortful and slow—like calculating the answer to a difficult math problem. 
With regard to flow, I like to imagine System 1 and System 2 as residing on 
opposite ends of the spectrum of thinking. The more automatic a cognitive 
process is, the more it slides toward the System 1 side of the spectrum. The more 
effortful a task is, the more it slides toward System 2. Flow, I believe, resides on 
the razor’s edge between System 1 and System 2. You are fully using all of your 
automatic and implicit knowledge related to the task while also working hard to 
rise to a challenge beyond your ability. Both brain modes are fully engaged. The 
conscious and nonconscious are working perfectly in sync. 


* The discovery of variable rewards happened by accident. One day in the lab, 
the famous Harvard psychologist B. F. Skinner was running low on food pellets 
during one experiment and making more was a time-consuming process because 
he had to manually press the pellets in a machine. This situation led him to “ask 
myself why every press of the lever had to be reinforced.” He decided to only 
give treats to the rats intermittently and, to his surprise, varying the delivery of 
food did not decrease behavior, but actually increased it. 


* T created a template for readers interested in keeping a decision journal. It is 
included as part of the habit journal at atomichabits.com/journal. 


* You can see my previous Annual Reviews at jamesclear.com/annual-review. 


* You can see my previous Integrity Reports at jamesclear.com/integrity. 


* Sorites is derived from the Greek word sorós, which means heap or pile. 




T 


N K I N G, 


FAS T a^TSTTOAV 

DANIEL 
KAHNEMAN 


WINNER OF THE NOBEL PRIZE IN ECONOMICS 



THINKING, 


FAST AND SLOW 


DANIEL 

KAHNEMAN 


FARRAR, STRAUS AND GIROUX 


NEW YORK 



In memory of Amos Tversky 



Contents 


Introduction 


Part I. Two Systems 

1. The Characters of the Story 

2. Attention and Effort 

3. The Lazy Controller 

4. The Associative Machine 

5. Cognitive Ease 

6. Norms, Surprises, and Causes 

7. A Machine for Jumping to Conclusions 

8. How Judgments Ha ppen 

9. Answering an Easier Question 

Part II. Heuristics and Biases 

10. The Law of Small Numbers 

&lt;5&gt; 

11. Anchors 

12. The Science of Availability 

13. Availability. Emotion, and Risk 

14. Tom Ws Specialty 

















15. Linda: Less is More 


16. Causes Trump Statistics 

17. Regression to the Mean 

18. Taming Intuitive Predictions 

Part III. Overconfidence 

19. The Illusion of Understanding 

20. The Illusion of Validity 

21. Intuitions Vs. Formulas 

22. Expert Intuition: When Can We Trust It? 

23. The Outside View 

24. The Engine of Capitalism 

Part IV. Choices 

25. Bernoulli’s Errors 

26. Prospect Theory 

27. The Endowment Effect 

28. Bad Events 

29. The Fourfold Pattern 

30. Rare Events 

31. Risk Policies 



















32. Keeping Score 


33. Reversals 

34. Frames and Reality 

Part V. Two Selves 

35. Two Selves 

36. Life as a Story 

37. Experienced Well-Being 

38. Thinking About Life 

Conclusions 

A ppendix A: Judgment 

Uncertainty 

Appendix B: Choices. Values, and Frames 

Acknowledgments 

Notes 


Under 


Index 















Introduction 


Every author, I suppose, has in mind a setting in which readers of his or her 
work could benefit from having read it. Mine is the proverbial office 
watercooler, where opinions are shared and gossip is exchanged. I hope 
to enrich the vocabulary that people use when they talk about the 
judgments and choices of others, the company’s new policies, or a 
colleague’s investment decisions. Why be concerned with gossip? 
Because it is much easier, as well as far more enjoyable, to identify and 
label the mistakes of others than to recognize our own. Questioning what 
we believe and want is difficult at the best of times, and especially difficult 
when we most need to do it, but we can benefit from the informed opinions 
of others. Many of us spontaneously anticipate how friends and colleagues 
will evaluate our choices; the quality and content of these anticipated 
judgments therefore matters. The expectation of intelligent gossip is a 
powerful motive for serious self-criticism, more powerful than New Year 
resolutions to improve one’s decision making at work and at home. 

To be a good diagnostician, a physician needs to acquire a large set of 
labels for diseases, each of which binds an idea of the illness and its 
symptoms, possible antecedents and causes, possible developments and 
consequences, and possible interventions to cure or mitigate the illness. 
Learning medicine consists in part of learning the language of medicine. A 
deeper understanding of judgments and choices also requires a richer 
vocabulary than is available in everyday language. The hope for informed 
gossip is that there are distinctive patterns in the errors people make. 
Systematic errors are known as biases, and they recur predictably in 
particular circumstances. When the handsome and confident speaker 
bounds onto the stage, for example, you can anticipate that the audience 
will judge his comments more favorably than he deserves. The availability 
of a diagnostic label for this bias—the halo effect—makes it easier to 
anticipate, recognize, and understand. 

When you are asked what you are thinking about, you can normally 
answer. You believe you know what goes on in your mind, which often 
consists of one conscious thought leading in an orderly way to another. But 
that is not the only way the mind works, nor indeed is that the typical way. 
Most impressions and thoughts arise in your conscious experience without 
your knowing how they got there. You cannot tracryd&gt;e how you came to 
the belief that there is a lamp on the desk in front of you, or how you 
detected a hint of irritation in your spouse’s voice on the telephone, or how 



you managed to avoid a threat on the road before you became consciously 
aware of it. The mental work that produces impressions, intuitions, and 
many decisions goes on in silence in our mind. 

Much of the discussion in this book is about biases of intuition. However, 
the focus on error does not denigrate human intelligence, any more than 
the attention to diseases in medical texts denies good health. Most of us 
are healthy most of the time, and most of our judgments and actions are 
appropriate most of the time. As we navigate our lives, we normally allow 
ourselves to be guided by impressions and feelings, and the confidence 
we have in our intuitive beliefs and preferences is usually justified. But not 
always. We are often confident even when we are wrong, and an objective 
observer is more likely to detect our errors than we are. 

So this is my aim for watercooler conversations: improve the ability to 
identify and understand errors of judgment and choice, in others and 
eventually in ourselves, by providing a richer and more precise language to 
discuss them. In at least some cases, an accurate diagnosis may suggest 
an intervention to limit the damage that bad judgments and choices often 
cause. 


Origins 

This book presents my current understanding of judgment and decision 
making, which has been shaped by psychological discoveries of recent 
decades. However, I trace the central ideas to the lucky day in 1969 when I 
asked a colleague to speak as a guest to a seminar I was teaching in the 
Department of Psychology at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem. Amos 
Tversky was considered a rising star in the field of decision research— 
indeed, in anything he did—so I knew we would have an interesting time. 
Many people who knew Amos thought he was the most intelligent person 
they had ever met. He was brilliant, voluble, and charismatic. He was also 
blessed with a perfect memory for jokes and an exceptional ability to use 
them to make a point. There was never a dull moment when Amos was 
around. He was then thirty-two; I was thirty-five. 

Amos told the class about an ongoing program of research at the 
University of Michigan that sought to answer this question: Are people 
good intuitive statisticians? We already knew that people are good 
intuitive grammarians: at age four a child effortlessly conforms to the rules 
of grammar as she speaks, although she has no idea that such rules exist. 
Do people have a similar intuitive feel for the basic principles of statistics? 
Amos reported that the answer was a qualified yes. We had a lively debate 
in the seminar and ultimately concluded that a qualified no was a better 



answer. 

Amos and I enjoyed the exchange and concluded that intuitive statistics 
was an interesting topic and that it would be fun to explore it together. That 
Friday we met for lunch at Cafe Rimon, the favorite hangout of bohemians 
and professors in Jerusalem, and planned a study of the statistical 
intuitions of sophisticated researchers. We had concluded in the seminar 
that our own intuitions were deficient. In spite of years of teaching and 
using statistics, we had not developed an intuitive sense of the reliability of 
statistical results observed in small samples. Our subjective judgments 
were biased: we were far too willing to believe research findings based on 
inadequate evidence and prone to collect too few observations in our own 
research. The goal of our study was to examine whether other researchers 
suffered from the same affliction. 

We prepared a survey that included realistic scenarios of statistical 
issues that arise in research. Amos collected the responses of a group of 
expert participants in a meeting of the Society of Mathematical 
Psychology, including the authors of two statistical textbooks. As expected, 
we found that our expert colleagues, like us, greatly exaggerated the 
likelihood that the original result of an experiment would be successfully 
replicated even with a small sample. They also gave very poor advice to a 
fictitious graduate student about the number of observations she needed 
to collect. Even statisticians were not good intuitive statisticians. 

While writing the article that reported these findings, Amos and I 
discovered that we enjoyed working together. Amos was always very 
funny, and in his presence I became funny as well, so we spent hours of 
solid work in continuous amusement. The pleasure we found in working 
together made us exceptionally patient; it is much easier to strive for 
perfection when you are never bored. Perhaps most important, we 
checked our critical weapons at the door. Both Amos and I were critical 
and argumentative, he even more than I, but during the years of our 
collaboration neither of us ever rejected out of hand anything the other 
said. Indeed, one of the great joys I found in the collaboration was that 
Amos frequently saw the point of my vague ideas much more clearly than I 
did. Amos was the more logical thinker, with an orientation to theory and 
an unfailing sense of direction. I was more intuitive and rooted in the 
psychology of perception, from which we borrowed many ideas. We were 
sufficiently similar to understand each other easily, and sufficiently different 
to surprise each other. We developed a routine in which we spent much of 
our working days together, often on long walks. For the next fourteen years 
our collaboration was the focus of our lives, and the work we did together 
during those years was the best either of us ever did. 

We quickly adopted a practice that we maintained for many years. Our 



research was a conversation, in which we invented questions and jointly 
examined our intuitive answers. Each question was a small experiment, 
and we carried out many experiments in a single day. We were not 
seriously looking for the correct answer to the statistical questions we 
posed. Our aim was to identify and analyze the intuitive answer, the first 
one that came to mind, the one we were tempted to make even when we 
knew it to be wrong. We believed—correctly, as it happened—that any 
intuition that the two of us shared would be shared by many other people 
as well, and that it would be easy to demonstrate its effects on judgments. 

We once discovered with great delight that we had identical silly ideas 
about the future professions of several toddlers we both knew. We could 
identify the argumentative three-year-old lawyer, the nerdy professor, the 
empathetic and mildly intrusive psychotherapist. Of course these 
predictions were absurd, but we still found them appealing. It was also 
clear that our intuitions were governed by the resemblance of each child to 
the cultural stereotype of a profession. The amusing exercise helped us 
develop a theory that was emerging in our minds at the time, about the role 
of resemblance in predictions. We went on to test and elaborate that 
theory in dozens of experiments, as in the following example. 

As you consider the next question, please assume that Steve was 
selected at random from a representative sample: 

An individual has been described by a neighbor as follows: 
“Steve is very shy and withdrawn, invariably helpful but with little 
interest in people or in the world of reality. A meek and tidy soul, 
he has a need for order and structurut and stre, and a passion for 
detail.” Is Steve more likely to be a librarian or a farmer? 

The resemblance of Steve’s personality to that of a stereotypical librarian 
strikes everyone immediately, but equally relevant statistical 
considerations are almost always ignored. Did it occur to you that there 
are more than 20 male farmers for each male librarian in the United 
States? Because there are so many more farmers, it is almost certain that 
more “meek and tidy” souls will be found on tractors than at library 
information desks. However, we found that participants in our experiments 
ignored the relevant statistical facts and relied exclusively on resemblance. 
We proposed that they used resemblance as a simplifying heuristic 
(roughly, a rule of thumb) to make a difficult judgment. The reliance on the 
heuristic caused predictable biases (systematic errors) in their 
predictions. 

On another occasion, Amos and I wondered about the rate of divorce 
among professors in our university. We noticed that the question triggered 



a search of memory for divorced professors we knew or knew about, and 
that we judged the size of categories by the ease with which instances 
came to mind. We called this reliance on the ease of memory search the 
availability heuristic. In one of our studies, we asked participants to answer 
a simple question about words in a typical English text: 

Consider the letter K. 

Is K more likely to appear as the first letter in a word OR as the 

third letter? 

As any Scrabble player knows, it is much easier to come up with words 
that begin with a particular letter than to find words that have the same 
letter in the third position. This is true for every letter of the alphabet. We 
therefore expected respondents to exaggerate the frequency of letters 
appearing in the first position—even those letters (such as K, L, N, R, V) 
which in fact occur more frequently in the third position. Here again, the 
reliance on a heuristic produces a predictable bias in judgments. For 
example, I recently came to doubt my long-held impression that adultery is 
more common among politicians than among physicians or lawyers. I had 
even come up with explanations for that “fact,” including the aphrodisiac 
effect of power and the temptations of life away from home. I eventually 
realized that the transgressions of politicians are much more likely to be 
reported than the transgressions of lawyers and doctors. My intuitive 
impression could be due entirely to journalists’ choices of topics and to my 
reliance on the availability heuristic. 

Amos and I spent several years studying and documenting biases of 
intuitive thinking in various tasks—assigning probabilities to events, 
forecasting the future, assessing hypotheses, and estimating frequencies. 
In the fifth year of our collaboration, we presented our main findings in 
Science magazine, a publication read by scholars in many disciplines. The 
article (which is reproduced in full at the end of this book) was titled 
“Judgment Under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases.” It described the 
simplifying shortcuts of intuitive thinking and explained some 20 biases as 
manifestations of these heuristics—and also as demonstrations of the role 
of heuristics in judgment. 

Historians of science have often noted that at any given time scholars in 
a particular field tend to share basic re share assumptions about their 
subject. Social scientists are no exception; they rely on a view of human 
nature that provides the background of most discussions of specific 
behaviors but is rarely questioned. Social scientists in the 1970s broadly 
accepted two ideas about human nature. First, people are generally 



rational, and their thinking is normally sound. Second, emotions such as 
fear, affection, and hatred explain most of the occasions on which people 
depart from rationality. Our article challenged both assumptions without 
discussing them directly. We documented systematic errors in the thinking 
of normal people, and we traced these errors to the design of the 
machinery of cognition rather than to the corruption of thought by emotion. 

Our article attracted much more attention than we had expected, and it 
remains one of the most highly cited works in social science (more than 
three hundred scholarly articles referred to it in 2010). Scholars in other 
disciplines found it useful, and the ideas of heuristics and biases have 
been used productively in many fields, including medical diagnosis, legal 
judgment, intelligence analysis, philosophy, finance, statistics, and military 
strategy. 

For example, students of policy have noted that the availability heuristic 
helps explain why some issues are highly salient in the public’s mind while 
others are neglected. People tend to assess the relative importance of 
issues by the ease with which they are retrieved from memory—and this is 
largely determined by the extent of coverage in the media. Frequently 
mentioned topics populate the mind even as others slip away from 
awareness. In turn, what the media choose to report corresponds to their 
view of what is currently on the public’s mind. It is no accident that 
authoritarian regimes exert substantial pressure on independent media. 
Because public interest is most easily aroused by dramatic events and by 
celebrities, media feeding frenzies are common. For several weeks after 
Michael Jackson’s death, for example, it was virtually impossible to find a 
television channel reporting on another topic. In contrast, there is little 
coverage of critical but unexciting issues that provide less drama, such as 
declining educational standards or overinvestment of medical resources in 
the last year of life. (As I write this, I notice that my choice of “little-covered” 
examples was guided by availability. The topics I chose as examples are 
mentioned often; equally important issues that are less available did not 
come to my mind.) 

We did not fully realize it at the time, but a key reason for the broad 
appeal of “heuristics and biases” outside psychology was an incidental 
feature of our work: we almost always included in our articles the full text of 
the questions we had asked ourselves and our respondents. These 
questions served as demonstrations for the reader, allowing him to 
recognize how his own thinking was tripped up by cognitive biases. I hope 
you had such an experience as you read the question about Steve the 
librarian, which was intended to help you appreciate the power of 
resemblance as a cue to probability and to see how easy it is to ignore 
relevant statistical facts. 



The use of demonstrations provided scholars from diverse disciplines— 
notably philosophers and economists—an unusual opportunity to observe 
possible flaws in their own thinking. Having seen themselves fail, they 
became more likely to question the dogmatic assumption, prevalent at the 
time, that the human mind is rational and logical. The choice of method 
was crucial: if we had reported results of only conventional experiments, 
the article would have been less noteworthy and less memorable. 
Furthermore, skeptical readers would have distanced themselves from the 
results by attributing judgment errors to the familiar I the famifecklessness 
of undergraduates, the typical participants in psychological studies. Of 
course, we did not choose demonstrations over standard experiments 
because we wanted to influence philosophers and economists. We 
preferred demonstrations because they were more fun, and we were lucky 
in our choice of method as well as in many other ways. A recurrent theme 
of this book is that luck plays a large role in every story of success; it is 
almost always easy to identify a small change in the story that would have 
turned a remarkable achievement into a mediocre outcome. Our story was 
no exception. 

The reaction to our work was not uniformly positive. In particular, our 
focus on biases was criticized as suggesting an unfairly negative view of 
the mind. As expected in normal science, some investigators refined our 
ideas and others offered plausible alternatives. By and large, though, the 
idea that our minds are susceptible to systematic errors is now generally 
accepted. Our research on judgment had far more effect on social science 
than we thought possible when we were working on it. 

Immediately after completing our review of judgment, we switched our 
attention to decision making under uncertainty. Our goal was to develop a 
psychological theory of how people make decisions about simple 
gambles. For example: Would you accept a bet on the toss of a coin where 
you win $130 if the coin shows heads and lose $100 if it shows tails? 
These elementary choices had long been used to examine broad 
questions about decision making, such as the relative weight that people 
assign to sure things and to uncertain outcomes. Our method did not 
change: we spent many days making up choice problems and examining 
whether our intuitive preferences conformed to the logic of choice. Here 
again, as in judgment, we observed systematic biases in our own 
decisions, intuitive preferences that consistently violated the rules of 
rational choice. Five years after the Science article, we published 
“Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision Under Risk,” a theory of choice 
that is by some counts more influential than our work on judgment, and is 
one of the foundations of behavioral economics. 



Until geographical separation made it too difficult to go on, Amos and I 
enjoyed the extraordinary good fortune of a shared mind that was superior 
to our individual minds and of a relationship that made our work fun as well 
as productive. Our collaboration on judgment and decision making was the 
reason for the Nobel Prize that I received in 2002, which Amos would have 
shared had he not died, aged fifty-nine, in 1996. 

Where we are now 

This book is not intended as an exposition of the early research that Amos 
and I conducted together, a task that has been ably carried out by many 
authors over the years. My main aim here is to present a view of how the 
mind works that draws on recent developments in cognitive and social 
psychology. One of the more important developments is that we now 
understand the marvels as well as the flaws of intuitive thought. 

Amos and I did not address accurate intuitions beyond the casual 
statement that judgment heuristics “are quite useful, but sometimes lead to 
severe and systematic errors.” We focused on biases, both because we 
found them interesting in their own right and because they provided 
evidence for the heuristics of judgment. We did not ask ourselves whether 
all intuitive judgments under uncertainty are produced by the heuristics we 
studied; it is now clear that they are not. In particular, the accurate intuitions 
of experts are better explained by the effects of prolonged practice than by 
heuristics. We can now draw a richer andigha riche more balanced 
picture, in which skill and heuristics are alternative sources of intuitive 
judgments and choices. 

The psychologist Gary Klein tells the story of a team of firefighters that 
entered a house in which the kitchen was on fire. Soon after they started 
hosing down the kitchen, the commander heard himself shout, “Let’s get 
out of here!” without realizing why. The floor collapsed almost immediately 
after the firefighters escaped. Only after the fact did the commander realize 
that the fire had been unusually quiet and that his ears had been unusually 
hot. Together, these impressions prompted what he called a “sixth sense 
of danger.” He had no idea what was wrong, but he knew something was 
wrong. It turned out that the heart of the fire had not been in the kitchen but 
in the basement beneath where the men had stood. 

We have all heard such stories of expert intuition: the chess master who 
walks past a street game and announces “White mates in three” without 
stopping, or the physician who makes a complex diagnosis after a single 
glance at a patient. Expert intuition strikes us as magical, but it is not. 
Indeed, each of us performs feats of intuitive expertise many times each 



day. Most of us are pitch-perfect in detecting anger in the first word of a 
telephone call, recognize as we enter a room that we were the subject of 
the conversation, and quickly react to subtle signs that the driver of the car 
in the next lane is dangerous. Our everyday intuitive abilities are no less 
marvelous than the striking insights of an experienced firefighter or 
physician—only more common. 

The psychology of accurate intuition involves no magic. Perhaps the 
best short statement of it is by the great Herbert Simon, who studied chess 
masters and showed that after thousands of hours of practice they come to 
see the pieces on the board differently from the rest of us. &gt;bu can feel 
Simon’s impatience with the mythologizing of expert intuition when he 
writes: “The situation has provided a cue; this cue has given the expert 
access to information stored in memory, and the information provides the 
answer. Intuition is nothing more and nothing less than recognition.” 

We are not surprised when a two-year-old looks at a dog and says 
“doggie!” because we are used to the miracle of children learning to 
recognize and name things. Simon’s point is that the miracles of expert 
intuition have the same character. Valid intuitions develop when experts 
have learned to recognize familiar elements in a new situation and to act in 
a manner that is appropriate to it. Good intuitive judgments come to mind 
with the same immediacy as “doggie!” 

Unfortunately, professionals’ intuitions do not all arise from true 
expertise. Many years ago I visited the chief investment officer of a large 
financial firm, who told me that he had just invested some tens of millions of 
dollars in the stock of Ford Motor Company. When I asked how he had 
made that decision, he replied that he had recently attended an automobile 
show and had been impressed. “Boy, do they know how to make a car!” 
was his explanation. He made it very clear that he trusted his gut feeling 
and was satisfied with himself and with his decision. I found it remarkable 
that he had apparently not considered the one question that an economist 
would call relevant: Is Ford stock currently underpriced? Instead, he had 
listened to his intuition; he liked the cars, he liked the company, and he 
liked the idea of owning its stock. From what we know about the accuracy 
of stock picking, it is reasonable to believe that he did not know what he 
was doing. 

The specific heuristics that Amos and I studied proviheitudied de little 
help in understanding how the executive came to invest in Ford stock, but a 
broader conception of heuristics now exists, which offers a good account. 
An important advance is that emotion now looms much larger in our 
understanding of intuitive judgments and choices than it did in the past. 
The executive’s decision would today be described as an example of the 
affect heuristic, where judgments and decisions are guided directly by 



feelings of liking and disliking, with little deliberation or reasoning. 

When confronted with a problem—choosing a chess move or deciding 
whether to invest in a stock—the machinery of intuitive thought does the 
best it can. If the individual has relevant expertise, she will recognize the 
situation, and the intuitive solution that comes to her mind is likely to be 
correct. This is what happens when a chess master looks at a complex 
position: the few moves that immediately occur to him are all strong. When 
the question is difficult and a skilled solution is not available, intuition still 
has a shot: an answer may come to mind quickly—but it is not an answer 
to the original question. The question that the executive faced (should I 
invest in Ford stock?) was difficult, but the answer to an easier and related 
question (do I like Ford cars?) came readily to his mind and determined 
his choice. This is the essence of intuitive heuristics: when faced with a 
difficult question, we often answer an easier one instead, usually without 
noticing the substitution. 

The spontaneous search for an intuitive solution sometimes fails— 
neither an expert solution nor a heuristic answer comes to mind. In such 
cases we often find ourselves switching to a slower, more deliberate and 
effortful form of thinking. This is the slow thinking of the title. Fast thinking 
includes both variants of intuitive thought—the expert and the heuristic—as 
well as the entirely automatic mental activities of perception and memory, 
the operations that enable you to know there is a lamp on your desk or 
retrieve the name of the capital of Russia. 

The distinction between fast and slow thinking has been explored by 
many psychologists over the last twenty-five years. For reasons that I 
explain more fully in the next chapter, I describe mental life by the metaphor 
of two agents, called System 1 and System 2, which respectively produce 
fast and slow thinking. I speak of the features of intuitive and deliberate 
thought as if they were traits and dispositions of two characters in your 
mind. In the picture that emerges from recent research, the intuitive System 
1 is more influential than your experience tells you, and it is the secret 
author of many of the choices and judgments you make. Most of this book 
is about the workings of System 1 and the mutual influences between it 
and System 2. 


What Comes Next 

The book is divided into five parts. Part 1 presents the basic elements of a 
two-systems approach to judgment and choice. It elaborates the distinction 
between the automatic operations of System 1 and the controlled 
operations of System 2, and shows how associative memory, the core of 



System 1, continually constructs a coherent interpretation of what is going 
on in our world at any instant. I attempt to give a sense of the complexity 
and richness of the automatic and often unconscious processes that 
underlie intuitive thinking, and of how these automatic processes explain 
the heuristics of judgment. A goal is to introduce a language for thinking 
and talking about the mind. 

Part 2 updates the study of judgment heuristics and explores a major 
puzzle: Why is it so difficult for us to think statistically? We easily think 
associativelm lassociay, we think metaphorically, we think causally, but 
statistics requires thinking about many things at once, which is something 
that System 1 is not designed to do. 

The difficulties of statistical thinking contribute to the main theme of Part 
3, which describes a puzzling limitation of our mind: our excessive 
confidence in what we believe we know, and our apparent inability to 
acknowledge the full extent of our ignorance and the uncertainty of the 
world we live in. We are prone to overestimate how much we understand 
about the world and to underestimate the role of chance in events. 
Overconfidence is fed by the illusory certainty of hindsight. My views on this 
topic have been influenced by Nassim Taleb, the author of The Black 
Swan. I hope for watercooler conversations that intelligently explore the 
lessons that can be learned from the past while resisting the lure of 
hindsight and the illusion of certainty. 

The focus of part 4 is a conversation with the discipline of economics on 
the nature of decision making and on the assumption that economic 
agents are rational. This section of the book provides a current view, 
informed by the two-system model, of the key concepts of prospect theory, 
the model of choice that Amos and I published in 1979. Subsequent 
chapters address several ways human choices deviate from the rules of 
rationality. I deal with the unfortunate tendency to treat problems in 
isolation, and with framing effects, where decisions are shaped by 
inconsequential features of choice problems. These observations, which 
are readily explained by the features of System 1, present a deep 
challenge to the rationality assumption favored in standard economics. 

Part 5 describes recent research that has introduced a distinction 
between two selves, the experiencing self and the remembering self, which 
do not have the same interests. For example, we can expose people to 
two painful experiences. One of these experiences is strictly worse than 
the other, because it is longer. But the automatic formation of memories— 
a feature of System 1—has its rules, which we can exploit so that the 
worse episode leaves a better memory. When people later choose which 
episode to repeat, they are, naturally, guided by their remembering self 



and expose themselves (their experiencing self) to unnecessary pain. The 
distinction between two selves is applied to the measurement of well¬ 
being, where we find again that what makes the experiencing self happy is 
not quite the same as what satisfies the remembering self. How two selves 
within a single body can pursue happiness raises some difficult questions, 
both for individuals and for societies that view the well-being of the 
population as a policy objective. 

A concluding chapter explores, in reverse order, the implications of three 
distinctions drawn in the book: between the experiencing and the 
remembering selves, between the conception of agents in classical 
economics and in behavioral economics (which borrows from psychology), 
and between the automatic System 1 and the effortful System 2.1 return to 
the virtues of educating gossip and to what organizations might do to 
improve the quality of judgments and decisions that are made on their 
behalf. 

Two articles I wrote with Amos are reproduced as appendixes to the 
book. The first is the review of judgment under uncertainty that I described 
earlier. The second, published in 1984, summarizes prospect theory as 
well as our studies of framing effects. The articles present the contributions 
that were cited by the Nobel committee—and you may be surprised by 
how simple they are. Reading them will give you a sense of how much we 
knew a long time ago, and also of how much we have learned in recent 
decades. 



Part 1 



Two Systems 



The Characters of the Story 

To observe your mind in automatic mode, glance at the image below. 



Figure 1 

Your experience as you look at the woman’s face seamlessly combines 
what we normally call seeing and intuitive thinking. As surely and quickly as 
you saw that the young woman’s hair is dark, you knew she is angry. 
Furthermore, what you saw extended into the future. You sensed that this 
woman is about to say some very unkind words, probably in a loud and 
strident voice. A premonition of what she was going to do next came to 
mind automatically and effortlessly. You did not intend to assess her mood 
or to anticipate what she might do, and your reaction to the picture did not 
have the feel of something you did. It just happened to you. It was an 
instance of fast thinking. 

Now look at the following problem: 


17 *24 


You knew immediately that this is a multiplication problem, and probably 
knew that you could solve it, with paper and pencil, if not without. \bu also 
had some vague intuitive knowledge of the range of possible results. You 
would be quick to recognize that both 12,609 and 123 are implausible. 
Without spending some time on the problem, however, you would not be 



certain that the answer is not 568. A precise solution did not come to mind, 
and you felt that you could choose whether or not to engage in the 
computation. If you have not done so yet, you should attempt the 
multiplication problem now, completing at least part of it. 

\bu experienced slow thinking as you proceeded through a sequence of 
steps. You first retrieved from memory the cognitive program for 
multiplication that you learned in school, then you implemented it. Carrying 
out the computation was a strain. You felt the burden of holding much 
material in memory, as you needed to keep track of where you were and of 
where you were going, while holding on to the intermediate result. The 
process was mental work: deliberate, effortful, and orderly—a prototype of 
slow thinking. The computation was not only an event in your mind; your 
body was also involved. Your muscles tensed up, your blood pressure 
rose, and your heart rate increased. Someone looking closely at your eyes 
while you tackled this problem would have seen your pupils dilate. \bur 
pupils contracted back to normal size as soon as you ended your work— 
when you found the answer (which is 408, by the way) or when you gave 
up. 


Two Systems 

Psychologists have been intensely interested for several decades in the 
two modagee fi Pn="cees of thinking evoked by the picture of the angry 
woman and by the multiplication problem, and have offered many labels for 
them. I adopt terms originally proposed by the psychologists Keith 
Stanovich and Richard West, and will refer to two systems in the mind, 
System 1 and System 2. 


• System 1 operates automatically and quickly, with little or no effort 
and no sense of voluntary control. 

• System 2 allocates attention to the effortful mental activities that 
demand it, including complex computations. The operations of 
System 2 are often associated with the subjective experience of 
agency, choice, and concentration. 


The labels of System 1 and System 2 are widely used in psychology, but I 
go further than most in this book, which you can read as a psychodrama 
with two characters. 

When we think of ourselves, we identify with System 2, the conscious, 



reasoning self that has beliefs, makes choices, and decides what to think 
about and what to do. Although System 2 believes itself to be where the 
action is, the automatic System 1 is the hero of the book. I describe 
System 1 as effortlessly originating impressions and feelings that are the 
main sources of the explicit beliefs and deliberate choices of System 2. 
The automatic operations of System 1 generate surprisingly complex 
patterns of ideas, but only the slower System 2 can construct thoughts in an 
orderly series of steps. I also describe circumstances in which System 2 
takes over, overruling the freewheeling impulses and associations of 
System 1. \bu will be invited to think of the two systems as agents with 
their individual abilities, limitations, and functions. 

In rough order of complexity, here are some examples of the automatic 
activities that are attributed to System 1: 


• Detect that one object is more distant than another. 

• Orient to the source of a sudden sound. 

• Complete the phrase “bread and...” 

• Make a “disgust face” when shown a horrible picture. 

• Detect hostility in a voice. 

• Answer to 2 + 2 = ? 

• Read words on large billboards. 

• Drive a car on an empty road. 

• Find a strong move in chess (if you are a chess master). 

• Understand simple sentences. 

• Recognize that a “meek and tidy soul with a passion for detail” 
resembles an occupational stereotype. 


All these mental events belong with the angry woman—they occur 
automatically and require little or no effort. The capabilities of System 1 
include innate skills that we share with other animals. We are born 
prepared to perceive the world around us, recognize objects, orient 
attention, avoid losses, and fear spiders. Other mental activities become 
fast and automatic through prolonged practice. System 1 has learned 
associations between ideas (the capital of France?); it has also learned 
skills such as reading and understanding nuances of social situations. 
Some skills, such as finding strong chess moves, are acquired only by 
specialized experts. Others are widely shared. Detecting the similarity of a 
personality sketch to an occupatiohein occupatnal stereotype requires 
broad knowledge of the language and the culture, which most of us 



possess. The knowledge is stored in memory and accessed without 
intention and without effort. 

Several of the mental actions in the list are completely involuntary. You 
cannot refrain from understanding simple sentences in your own language 
or from orienting to a loud unexpected sound, nor can you prevent yourself 
from knowing that 2 + 2 = 4 or from thinking of Paris when the capital of 
France is mentioned. Other activities, such as chewing, are susceptible to 
voluntary control but normally run on automatic pilot. The control of attention 
is shared by the two systems. Orienting to a loud sound is normally an 
involuntary operation of System 1, which immediately mobilizes the 
voluntary attention of System 2. Y)u may be able to resist turning toward 
the source of a loud and offensive comment at a crowded party, but even if 
your head does not move, your attention is initially directed to it, at least for 
a while. However, attention can be moved away from an unwanted focus, 
primarily by focusing intently on another target. 

The highly diverse operations of System 2 have one feature in common: 
they require attention and are disrupted when attention is drawn away. 
Here are some examples: 


• Brace for the starter gun in a race. 

• Focus attention on the clowns in the circus. 

• Focus on the voice of a particular person in a crowded and noisy 
room. 

• Look for a woman with white hair. 

• Search memory to identify a surprising sound. 

• Maintain a faster walking speed than is natural for you. 

• Monitor the appropriateness of your behavior in a social situation. 

• Count the occurrences of the letter a in a page of text. 

• Tell someone your phone number. 

• Park in a narrow space (for most people except garage attendants). 

• Compare two washing machines for overall value. 

• Fill out a tax form. 

• Check the validity of a complex logical argument. 


In all these situations you must pay attention, and you will perform less well, 
or not at all, if you are not ready or if your attention is directed 
inappropriately. System 2 has some ability to change the way System 1 
works, by programming the normally automatic functions of attention and 
memory. When waiting for a relative at a busy train station, for example, 



you can set yourself at will to look for a white-haired woman or a bearded 
man, and thereby increase the likelihood of detecting your relative from a 
distance. You can set your memory to search for capital cities that start 
with N or for French existentialist novels. And when you rent a car at 
London’s Heathrow Airport, the attendant will probably remind you that “we 
drive on the left side of the road over here.” In all these cases, you are 
asked to do something that does not come naturally, and you will find that 
the consistent maintenance of a set requires continuous exertion of at least 
some effort. 

The often-used phrase “pay attention” is apt: you dispose of a limited 
budget of attention that you can allocate to activities, and if you try to 
i&gt;Cyou try tgo beyond your budget, you will fail. It is the mark of effortful 
activities that they interfere with each other, which is why it is difficult or 
impossible to conduct several at once. You could not compute the product 
of 17 x 24 while making a left turn into dense traffic, and you certainly 
should not try. You can do several things at once, but only if they are easy 
and undemanding. You are probably safe carrying on a conversation with a 
passenger while driving on an empty highway, and many parents have 
discovered, perhaps with some guilt, that they can read a story to a child 
while thinking of something else. 

Everyone has some awareness of the limited capacity of attention, and 
our social behavior makes allowances for these limitations. When the 
driver of a car is overtaking a truck on a narrow road, for example, adult 
passengers quite sensibly stop talking. They know that distracting the 
driver is not a good idea, and they also suspect that he is temporarily deaf 
and will not hear what they say. 

Intense focusing on a task can make people effectively blind, even to 
stimuli that normally attract attention. The most dramatic demonstration 
was offered by Christopher Chabris and Daniel Simons in their book The 
Invisible Gorilla. They constructed a short film of two teams passing 
basketballs, one team wearing white shirts, the other wearing black. The 
viewers of the film are instructed to count the number of passes made by 
the white team, ignoring the black players. This task is difficult and 
completely absorbing. Halfway through the video, a woman wearing a 
gorilla suit appears, crosses the court, thumps her chest, and moves on. 
The gorilla is in view for 9 seconds. Many thousands of people have seen 
the video, and about half of them do not notice anything unusual. It is the 
counting task—and especially the instruction to ignore one of the teams— 
that causes the blindness. No one who watches the video without that task 
would miss the gorilla. Seeing and orienting are automatic functions of 
System 1, but they depend on the allocation of some attention to the 



relevant stimulus. The authors note that the most remarkable observation 
of their study is that people find its results very surprising. Indeed, the 
viewers who fail to see the gorilla are initially sure that it was not there— 
they cannot imagine missing such a striking event. The gorilla study 
illustrates two important facts about our minds: we can be blind to the 
obvious, and we are also blind to our blindness. 

Plot Synopsis 

The interaction of the two systems is a recurrent theme of the book, and a 
brief synopsis of the plot is in order. In the story I will tell, Systems 1 and 2 
are both active whenever we are awake. System 1 runs automatically and 
System 2 is normally in a comfortable low-effort mode, in which only a 
fraction of its capacity is engaged. System 1 continuously generates 
suggestions for System 2: impressions, intuitions, intentions, and feelings. 
If endorsed by System 2, impressions and intuitions turn into beliefs, and 
impulses turn into voluntary actions. When all goes smoothly, which is most 
of the time, System 2 adopts the suggestions of System 1 with little or no 
modification. You generally believe your impressions and act on your 
desires, and that is fine—usually. 

When System 1 runs into difficulty, it calls on System 2 to support more 
detailed and specific processing that may solve the problem of the 
moment. System 2 is mobilized when a question arises for which System 1 
does not offer an answer, as probably happened to you when you 
encountered the multiplication problem 17 * 24. Y)u can also feel a surge 
of conscious attention whenever you are surprised. System 2 is activ"&gt;&lt; 2 
is actated when an event is detected that violates the model of the world 
that System 1 maintains. In that world, lamps do not jump, cats do not bark, 
and gorillas do not cross basketball courts. The gorilla experiment 
demonstrates that some attention is needed for the surprising stimulus to 
be detected. Surprise then activates and orients your attention: you will 
stare, and you will search your memory for a story that makes sense of the 
surprising event. System 2 is also credited with the continuous monitoring 
of your own behavior—the control that keeps you polite when you are 
angry, and alert when you are driving at night. System 2 is mobilized to 
increased effort when it detects an error about to be made. Remember a 
time when you almost blurted out an offensive remark and note how hard 
you worked to restore control. In summary, most of what you (your System 
2) think and do originates in your System 1, but System 2 takes over when 
things get difficult, and it normally has the last word. 

The division of labor between System 1 and System 2 is highly efficient: 



it minimizes effort and optimizes performance. The arrangement works 
well most of the time because System 1 is generally very good at what it 
does: its models of familiar situations are accurate, its short-term 
predictions are usually accurate as well, and its initial reactions to 
challenges are swift and generally appropriate. System 1 has biases, 
however, systematic errors that it is prone to make in specified 
circumstances. As we shall see, it sometimes answers easier questions 
than the one it was asked, and it has little understanding of logic and 
statistics. One further limitation of System 1 is that it cannot be turned off. If 
you are shown a word on the screen in a language you know, you will read 
it—unless your attention is totally focused elsewhere. 

Conflict 

Figure 2 is a variant of a classic experiment that produces a conflict 
between the two systems. You should try the exercise before reading on. 


Your first task is to go down both columns, calling out whether each word is 
printed in lowercase or in uppercase. When you are done with the first task, 
go down both columns again, saying whether each word is printed to the left 
or to the right of center by saying (or whispering to yourself) "LEFT" or 
“RIGHT." 


LEFT 

upper 


left 

lower 


right 


LOWER 

RIGHT 

upper 


RIGHT 

UPPER 


left 


lower 

LEFT 


LOWER 

right 


upper 


Figure 2 

You were almost certainly successful in saying the correct words in both 
tasks, and you surely discovered that some parts of each task were much 
easier than others. When you identified upper- and lowercase, the left- 
hand column was easy and the riqht-hand column caused you to slow down 



and perhaps to stammer or stumble. When you named the position of 
words, the left-hand column was difficult and the right-hand column was 
much easier. 

These tasks engage System 2, because saying “upper/lower” or 
“right/left” is not what you routinely do when looking down a column of 
words. One of the things you did to set yourself for the task was to program 
your memory so that the relevant words (upper and /oner for the first task) 
were “on the tip of your tongue.” The prioritizing of the chosen words is 
effective and the mild temptation to read other words was fairly easy to 
resist when you went through the first column. But the second column was 
different, because it contained words for which you were set, and you could 
not ignore them. You were mostly able to respond correctly, but 
overcoming the competing response was a strain, and it slowed you down. 
You experienced a conflict between a task that you intended to carry out 
and an automatic response that interfered with it. 

Conflict between an automatic reaction and an intention to conWhetion 
to ctrol it is common in our lives. We are all familiar with the experience of 
trying not to stare at the oddly dressed couple at the neighboring table in a 
restaurant. We also know what it is like to force our attention on a boring 
book, when we constantly find ourselves returning to the point at which the 
reading lost its meaning. Where winters are hard, many drivers have 
memories of their car skidding out of control on the ice and of the struggle 
to follow well-rehearsed instructions that negate what they would naturally 
do: “Steer into the skid, and whatever you do, do not touch the brakes!” 
And every human being has had the experience of not telling someone to 
go to hell. One of the tasks of System 2 is to overcome the impulses of 
System 1. In other words, System 2 is in charge of self-control. 

Illusions 

To appreciate the autonomy of System 1, as well as the distinction 
between impressions and beliefs, take a good look at figure 3. 

This picture is unremarkable: two horizontal lines of different lengths, 
with fins appended, pointing in different directions. The bottom line is 
obviously longer than the one above it. That is what we all see, and we 
naturally believe what we see. If you have already encountered this image, 
however, you recognize it as the famous Muller-Lyer illusion. As you can 
easily confirm by measuring them with a ruler, the horizontal lines are in 
fact identical in length. 



Figure 3 


Now that you have measured the lines, you—your System 2, the 
conscious being you call “I”—have a new belief: you knowihai the lines are 
equally long. If asked about their length, you will say what you know. But you 
still see the bottom line as longer. \bu have chosen to believe the 
measurement, but you cannot prevent System 1 from doing its thing; you 
cannot decide to see the lines as equal, although you know they are. To 
resist the illusion, there is only one thing you can do: you must learn to 
mistrust your impressions of the length of lines when fins are attached to 
them. To implement that rule, you must be able to recognize the illusory 
pattern and recall what you know about it. If you can do this, you will never 
again be fooled by the Mtiller-Lyer illusion. But you will still see one line as 
longer than the other. 

Not all illusions are visual. There are illusions of thought, which we call 
cognitive illusions. As a graduate student, I attended some courses on the 
art and science of psychotherapy. During one of these lectures, our 
teacher imparted a morsel of clinical wisdom. This is what he told us: ‘You 
will from time to time meet a patient who shares a disturbing tale of 
multiple mistakes in his previous treatment. He has been seen by several 
clinicians, and all failed him. The patient can lucidly describe how his 
therapists misunderstood him, but he has quickly perceived that you are 
different. \bu share the same feeling, are convinced that you understand 
him, and will be able to help.” At this point my teacher raised his voice as 
he said, “Do not even think of taking on this patient! Throw him out of the 
office! He is most likely a psychopath and you will not be able to help him.” 

Many years later I learned that the teacher had warned us against 
psychopathic charm, and the leading authority in the stm y in the udy of 





psychopathy confirmed that the teacher’s advice was sound. The analogy 
to the Muller-Lyer illusion is close. What we were being taught was not how 
to feel about that patient. Our teacher took it for granted that the sympathy 
we would feel for the patient would not be under our control; it would arise 
from System 1. Furthermore, we were not being taught to be generally 
suspicious of our feelings about patients. We were told that a strong 
attraction to a patient with a repeated history of failed treatment is a 
danger sign—like the fins on the parallel lines. It is an illusion—a cognitive 
illusion—and I (System 2) was taught how to recognize it and advised not 
to believe it or act on it. 

The question that is most often asked about cognitive illusions is 
whether they can be overcome. The message of these examples is not 
encouraging. Because System 1 operates automatically and cannot be 
turned off at will, errors of intuitive thought are often difficult to prevent. 
Biases cannot always be avoided, because System 2 may have no clue to 
the error. Even when cues to likely errors are available, errors can be 
prevented only by the enhanced monitoring and effortful activity of System 
2. As a way to live your life, however, continuous vigilance is not 
necessarily good, and it is certainly impractical. Constantly questioning our 
own thinking would be impossibly tedious, and System 2 is much too slow 
and inefficient to serve as a substitute for System 1 in making routine 
decisions. The best we can do is a compromise: learn to recognize 
situations in which mistakes are likely and try harder to avoid significant 
mistakes when the stakes are high. The premise of this book is that it is 
easier to recognize other people’s mistakes than our own. 

Useful Fictions 

You have been invited to think of the two systems as agents within the 
mind, with their individual personalities, abilities, and limitations. I will often 
use sentences in which the systems are the subjects, such as, “System 2 
calculates products.” 

The use of such language is considered a sin in the professional circles 
in which I travel, because it seems to explain the thoughts and actions of a 
person by the thoughts and actions of little people inside the person’s 
head. Grammatically the sentence about System 2 is similar to “The butler 
steals the petty cash.” My colleagues would point out that the butler’s action 
actually explains the disappearance of the cash, and they rightly question 
whether the sentence about System 2 explains how products are 
calculated. My answer is that the brief active sentence that attributes 
calculation to System 2 is intended as a description, not an explanation. It 



is meaningful only because of what you already know about System 2. It is 
shorthand for the following: “Mental arithmetic is a voluntary activity that 
requires effort, should not be performed while making a left turn, and is 
associated with dilated pupils and an accelerated heart rate.” 

Similarly, the statement that “highway driving under routine conditions is 
left to System 1” means that steering the car around a bend is automatic 
and almost effortless. It also implies that an experienced driver can drive 
on an empty highway while conducting a conversation. Finally, “System 2 
prevented James from reacting foolishly to the insult” means that James 
would have been more aggressive in his response if his capacity for 
effortful control had been disrupted (for example, if he had been drunk). 

System 1 and System 2 are so central to the story I tell in this book that I 
must make it absolutely clear that they are217at they a fictitious 
characters. Systems 1 and 2 are not systems in the standard sense of 
entities with interacting aspects or parts. And there is no one part of the 
brain that either of the systems would call home. You may well ask: What is 
the point of introducing fictitious characters with ugly names into a serious 
book? The answer is that the characters are useful because of some 
quirks of our minds, yours and mine. A sentence is understood more easily 
if it describes what an agent (System 2) does than if it describes what 
something is, what properties it has. In other words, “System 2” is a better 
subject for a sentence than “mental arithmetic.” The mind—especially 
System 1—appears to have a special aptitude for the construction and 
interpretation of stories about active agents, who have personalities, 
habits, and abilities. You quickly formed a bad opinion of the thieving 
butler, you expect more bad behavior from him, and you will remember him 
for a while. This is also my hope for the language of systems. 


Why call them System 1 and System 2 rather than the more descriptive 
“automatic system” and “effortful system”? The reason is simple: 
“Automatic system” takes longer to say than “System 1” and therefore 
takes more space in your working memory. This matters, because 
anything that occupies your working memory reduces your ability to think. 
You should treat “System 1” and “System 2” as nicknames, like Bob and 
Joe, identifying characters that you will get to know over the course of this 
book. The fictitious systems make it easier for me to think about judgment 
and choice, and will make it easier for you to understand what I say. 

Speaking of System 1 and System 2 



“He had an impression, but some of his impressions are 
illusions.” 


“This was a pure System 1 response. She reacted to the threat 
before she recognized it.” 


“This is your System 1 talking. Slow down and let your System 2 
take control.” 



Attention and Effort 


In the unlikely event of this book being made into a film, System 2 would be 
a supporting character who believes herself to be the hero. The defining 
feature of System 2, in this story, is that its operations are effortful, and one 
of its main characteristics is laziness, a reluctance to invest more effort 
than is strictly necessary. As a consequence, the thoughts and actions that 
System 2 believes it has chosen are often guided by the figure at the 
center of the story, System 1. However, there are vital tasks that only 
System 2 can perform because they require effort and acts of self-control 
in which the intuitions and impulses of System 1 are overcome. 

Mental Effort 

If you wish to experience your System 2 working at full tilt, the following 
exercise will do; it should br"0%e ca Tting you to the limits of your cognitive 
abilities within 5 seconds. To start, make up several strings of 4 digits, all 
different, and write each string on an index card. Place a blank card on top 
of the deck. The task that you will perform is called Add-1. Here is how it 
goes: 


Start beating a steady rhythm (or better yet, set a metronome at 
1/sec). Remove the blank card and read the four digits aloud. 
Wait for two beats, then report a string in which each of the 
original digits is incremented by 1. If the digits on the card are 
5294, the correct response is 6305. Keeping the rhythm is 
important. 

Few people can cope with more than four digits in the Add-1 task, but if 
you want a harder challenge, please try Add-3. 

If you would like to know what your body is doing while your mind is hard 
at work, set up two piles of books on a sturdy table, place a video camera 
on one and lean your chin on the other, get the video going, and stare at 
the camera lens while you work on Add-1 or Add-3 exercises. Later, you 
will find in the changing size of your pupils a faithful record of how hard you 
worked. 

I have a long personal history with the Add-1 task. Early in my career I 
spent a year at the University of Michigan, as a visitor in a laboratory that 
studied hypnosis. Casting about for a useful topic of research, I found an 
article in Scientific American in which the psychologist Eckhard Hess 
described the pupil of the eye as a window to the soul. I reread it recently 



and again found it inspiring. It begins with Hess reporting that his wife had 
noticed his pupils widening as he watched beautiful nature pictures, and it 
ends with two striking pictures of the same good-looking woman, who 
somehow appears much more attractive in one than in the other. There is 
only one difference: the pupils of the eyes appear dilated in the attractive 
picture and constricted in the other. Hess also wrote of belladonna, a pupil- 
dilating substance that was used as a cosmetic, and of bazaar shoppers 
who wear dark glasses in order to hide their level of interest from 
merchants. 

One of Hess’s findings especially captured my attention. He had noticed 
that the pupils are sensitive indicators of mental effort—they dilate 
substantially when people multiply two-digit numbers, and they dilate more 
if the problems are hard than if they are easy. His observations indicated 
that the response to mental effort is distinct from emotional arousal. Hess’s 
work did not have much to do with hypnosis, but I concluded that the idea 
of a visible indication of mental effort had promise as a research topic. A 
graduate student in the lab, Jackson Beatty, shared my enthusiasm and we 
got to work. 

Beatty and I developed a setup similar to an optician’s examination 
room, in which the experimental participant leaned her head on a chin-and- 
forehead rest and stared at a camera while listening to prerecorded 
information and answering questions on the recorded beats of a 
metronome. The beats triggered an infrared flash every second, causing a 
picture to be taken. At the end of each experimental session, we would 
rush to have the film developed, project the images of the pupil on a 
screen, and go to work with a ruler. The method was a perfect fit for young 
and impatient researchers: we knew our results almost immediately, and 
they always told a clear story. 

Beatty and I focused on paced tasks, such as Add-1, in which we knew 
precisely what was on the subject’s mind at any time. We recorded strings 
of digits on beats of the metronome and instructed the subject to repeat or 
transform the digits one indigits onby one, maintaining the same rhythm. 
We soon discovered that the size of the pupil varied second by second, 
reflecting the changing demands of the task. The shape of the response 
was an inverted V. As you experienced it if you tried Add-1 or Add-3, effort 
builds up with every added digit that you hear, reaches an almost 
intolerable peak as you rush to produce a transformed string during and 
immediately after the pause, and relaxes gradually as you “unload” your 
short-term memory. The pupil data corresponded precisely to subjective 
experience: longer strings reliably caused larger dilations, the 
transformation task compounded the effort, and the peak of pupil size 
coincided with maximum effort. Add-1 with four digits caused a larger 



dilation than the task of holding seven digits for immediate recall. Add-3, 
which is much more difficult, is the most demanding that I ever observed. In 
the first 5 seconds, the pupil dilates by about 50% of its original area and 
heart rate increases by about 7 beats per minute. This is as hard as 
people can work—they give up if more is asked of them. When we 
exposed our subjects to more digits than they could remember, their pupils 
stopped dilating or actually shrank. 

We worked for some months in a spacious basement suite in which we 
had set up a closed-circuit system that projected an image of the subject’s 
pupil on a screen in the corridor; we also could hear what was happening 
in the laboratory. The diameter of the projected pupil was about a foot; 
watching it dilate and contract when the participant was at work
 was a 
fascinating sight, quite an attraction for visitors in our lab. We amused 
ourselves and impressed our guests by our ability to divine when the 
participant gave up on a task. During a mental multiplication, the pupil 
normally dilated to a large size within a few seconds and stayed large as 
long as the individual kept working on the problem; it contracted 
immediately when she found a solution or gave up. As we watched from 
the corridor, we would sometimes surprise both the owner of the pupil and 
our guests by asking, “Why did you stop working just now?” The answer 
from inside the lab was often, “How did you know?” to which we would 
reply, “We have a window to your soul.” 

The casual observations we made from the corridor were sometimes as 
informative as the formal experiments. I made a significant discovery as I 
was idly watching a woman’s pupil during a break between two tasks. She 
had kept her position on the chin rest, so I could see the image of her eye 
while she engaged in routine conversation with the experimenter. I was 
surprised to see that the pupil remained small and did not noticeably dilate 
as she talked and listened. Unlike the tasks that we were studying, the 
mundane conversation apparently demanded little or no effort—no more 
than retaining two or three digits. This was a eureka moment: I realized that 
the tasks we had chosen for study were exceptionally effortful. An image 
came to mind: mental life—today I would speak of the life of System 2—is 
normally conducted at the pace of a comfortable walk, sometimes 
interrupted by episodes of jogging and on rare occasions by a frantic 
sprint. The Add-1 and Add-3 exercises are sprints, and casual chatting is 
a stroll. 

We found that people, when engaged in a mental sprint, may become 
effectively blind. The authors of The Invisible Gorilla had made the gorilla 
“invisible” by keeping the observers intensely busy counting passes. We 
reported a rather less dramatic example of blindness during Add-1. Our 



subjects were exposed to a series of rapidly flashing letters while they 
worked. They were told to give the task complete priority, but they were 
also asked to report, at the end of the digit task, whether the letter K had 
appeared at any rored at antime during the trial. The main finding was that 
the ability to detect and report the target letter changed in the course of the 
10 seconds of the exercise. The observers almost never missed a K that 
was shown at the beginning or near the end of the Add-1 task but they 
missed the target almost half the time when mental effort was at its peak, 
although we had pictures of their wide-open eye staring straight at it. 
Failures of detection followed the same inverted-V pattern as the dilating 
pupil. The similarity was reassuring: the pupil was a good measure of the 
physical arousal that accompanies mental effort, and we could go ahead 
and use it to understand how the mind works. 

Much like the electricity meter outside your house or apartment, the 
pupils offer an index of the current rate at which mental energy is used. The 
analogy goes deep. Your use of electricity depends on what you choose to 
do, whether to light a room or toast a piece of bread. When you turn on a 
bulb or a toaster, it draws the energy it needs but no more. Similarly, we 
decide what to do, but we have limited control over the effort of doing it. 
Suppose you are shown four digits, say, 9462, and told that your life 
depends on holding them in memory for 10 seconds. However much you 
want to live, you cannot exert as much effort in this task as you would be 
forced to invest to complete an Add-3 transformation on the same digits. 

System 2 and the electrical circuits in your home both have limited 
capacity, but they respond differently to threatened overload. A breaker 
trips when the demand for current is excessive, causing all devices on that 
circuit to lose power at once. In contrast, the response to mental overload 
is selective and precise: System 2 protects the most important activity, so 
it receives the attention it needs; “spare capacity” is allocated second by 
second to other tasks. In our version of the gorilla experiment, we 
instructed the participants to assign priority to the digit task. We know that 
they followed that instruction, because the timing of the visual target had no 
effect on the main task. If the critical letter was presented at a time of high 
demand, the subjects simply did not see it. When the transformation task 
was less demanding, detection performance was better. 

The sophisticated allocation of attention has been honed by a long 
evolutionary history. Orienting and responding quickly to the gravest threats 
or most promising opportunities improved the chance of survival, and this 
capability is certainly not restricted to humans. Even in modern humans, 
System 1 takes over in emergencies and assigns total priority to self- 
protective actions. Imagine yourself at the wheel of a car that unexpectedly 



skids on a large oil slick. You will find that you have responded to the threat 
before you became fully conscious of it. 

Beatty and I worked together for only a year, but our collaboration had a 
large effect on our subsequent careers. He eventually became the leading 
authority on “cognitive pupillometry,” and I wrote a book titled Attention and 
Effort, which was based in large part on what we learned together and on 
follow-up research I did at Harvard the following year. We learned a great 
deal about the working mind—which I now think of as System 2—from 
measuring pupils in a wide variety of tasks. 

As you become skilled in a task, its demand for energy diminishes. 
Studies of the brain have shown that the pattern of activity associated with 
an action changes as skill increases, with fewer brain regions involved. 
Talent has similar effects. Highly intelligent individuals need less effort to 
solve the same problems, as indicated by both pupil size and brain activity. 
A general “law of least effort” appd t” alies to cognitive as well as physical 
exertion. The law asserts that if there are several ways of achieving the 
same goal, people will eventually gravitate to the least demanding course 
of action. In the economy of action, effort is a cost, and the acquisition of 
skill is driven by the balance of benefits and costs. Laziness is built deep 
into our nature. 

The tasks that we studied varied considerably in their effects on the 
pupil. At baseline, our subjects were awake, aware, and ready to engage 
in a task—probably at a higher level of arousal and cognitive readiness 
than usual. Holding one or two digits in memory or learning to associate a 
word with a digit (3 = door) produced reliable effects on momentary 
arousal above that baseline, but the effects were minuscule, only 5% of the 
increase in pupil diameter associated with Add-3. A task that required 
discriminating between the pitch of two tones yielded significantly larger 
dilations. Recent research has shown that inhibiting the tendency to read 
distracting words (as in figure 2 of the preceding chapter) also induces 
moderate effort. Tests of short-term memory for six or seven digits were 
more effortful. As you can experience, the request to retrieve and say aloud 
your phone number or your spouse’s birthday also requires a brief but 
significant effort, because the entire string must be held in memory as a 
response is organized. Mental multiplication of two-digit numbers and the 
Add-3 task are near the limit of what most people can do. 

What makes some cognitive operations more demanding and effortful 
than others? What outcomes must we purchase in the currency of 
attention? What can System 2 do that System 1 cannot? We now have 
tentative answers to these questions. 

Effort is required to maintain simultaneously in memory several ideas 



that require separate actions, or that need to be combined according to a 
rule—rehearsing your shopping list as you enter the supermarket, 
choosing between the fish and the veal at a restaurant, or combining a 
surprising result from a survey with the information that the sample was 
small, for example. System 2 is the only one that can follow rules, compare 
objects on several attributes, and make deliberate choices between 
options. The automatic System 1 does not have these capabilities. System 
1 detects simple relations (“they are all alike,” “the son is much taller than 
the father”) and excels at integrating information about one thing, but it 
does not deal with multiple distinct topics at once, nor is it adept at using 
purely statistical information. System 1 will detect that a person described 
as “a meek and tidy soul, with a need for order and structure, and a 
passion for detail” resembles a caricature librarian, but combining this 
intuition with knowledge about the small number of librarians is a task that 
only System 2 can perform—if System 2 knows how to do so, which is true 
of few people. 

A crucial capability of System 2 is the adoption of “task sets”: it can 
program memory to obey an instruction that overrides habitual responses. 
Consider the following: Count all occurrences of the letter fin this page. 
This is not a task you have ever performed before and it will not come 
naturally to you, but your System 2 can take it on. It will be effortful to set 
yourself up for this exercise, and effortful to carry it out, though you will 
surely improve with practice. Psychologists speak of “executive control” to 
describe the adoption and termination of task sets, and neuroscientists 
have identified the main regions of the brain that serve the executive 
function. One of these regions is involved whenever a conflict must be 
resolved. Another is the prefrontal area of the brain, a region that is 
substantially more developed in humans tht un humans an in other 
primates, and is involved in operations that we associate with intelligence. 

Now suppose that at the end of the page you get another instruction: 
count all the commas in the next page. This will be harder, because you will 
have to overcome the newly acquired tendency to focus attention on the 
letter One of the significant discoveries of cognitive psychologists in 
recent decades is that switching from one task to another is effortful, 
especially under time pressure. The need for rapid switching is one of the 
reasons that Add-3 and mental multiplication are so difficult. To perform 
the Add-3 task, you must hold several digits in your working memory at the 
same time, associating each with a particular operation: some digits are in 
the queue to be transformed, one is in the process of transformation, and 
others, already transformed, are retained for reporting. Modern tests of 
working memory require the individual to switch repeatedly between two 



demanding tasks, retaining the results of one operation while performing 
the other. People who do well on these tests tend to do well on tests of 
general intelligence. However, the ability to control attention is not simply a 
measure of intelligence; measures of efficiency in the control of attention 
predict performance of air traffic controllers and of Israeli Air Force pilots 
beyond the effects of intelligence. 

Time pressure is another driver of effort. As you carried out the Add-3 
exercise, the rush was imposed in part by the metronome and in part by 
the load on memory. Like a juggler with several balls in the air, you cannot 
afford to slow down; the rate at which material decays in memory forces 
the pace, driving you to refresh and rehearse information before it is lost. 
Any task that requires you to keep several ideas in mind at the same time 
has the same hurried character. Unless you have the good fortune of a 
capacious working memory, you may be forced to work uncomfortably 
hard. The most effortful forms of slow thinking are those that require you to 
think fast. 

\bu surely observed as you performed Add-3 how unusual it is for your 
mind to work so hard. Even if you think for a living, few of the mental tasks 
in which you engage in the course of a working day are as demanding as 
Add-3, or even as demanding as storing six digits for immediate recall. 
We normally avoid mental overload by dividing our tasks into multiple easy 
steps, committing intermediate results to long-term memory or to paper 
rather than to an easily overloaded working memory. We cover long 
distances by taking our time and conduct our mental lives by the law of 
least effort. 


Speaking of Attention and Effort 


“I won’t try to solve this while driving. This is a pupil-dilating task. It 
requires mental effort!” 


“The law of least effort is operating here. He will think as little as 
possible.” 


“She did not forget about the meeting. She was completely 
focused on something else when the meeting was set and she 
just didn’t hear you.” 



“What came quickly to my mind was an intuition from System 1. I’ll 
have to start over and search my memory deliberately.” 



The Lazy Controller 


I spend a few months each year in Berkeley, and one of my great 
pleasures there is a daily four-mile walk on a marked path in the hills, with 
a fine view of San Francisco Bay. I usually keep track of my time and have 
learned a fair amount about effort from doing so. I have found a speed, 
about 17 minutes for a mile, which I experience as a stroll. I certainly exert 
physical effort and burn more calories at that speed than if I sat in a 
recliner, but I experience no strain, no conflict, and no need to push myself. 

I am also able to think and work while walking at that rate. Indeed, I suspect 
that the mild physical arousal of the walk may spill over into greater mental 
alertness. 

System 2 also has a natural speed. You expend some mental energy in 
random thoughts and in monitoring what goes on around you even when 
your mind does nothing in particular, but there is little strain. Unless you are 
in a situation that makes you unusually wary or self-conscious, monitoring 
what happens in the environment or inside your head demands little effort. 
You make many small decisions as you drive your car, absorb some 
information as you read the newspaper, and conduct routine exchanges of 
pleasantries with a spouse or a colleague, all with little effort and no strain. 
Just like a stroll. 

It is normally easy and actually quite pleasant to walk and think at the 
same time, but at the extremes these activities appear to compete for the 
limited resources of System 2. You can confirm this claim by a simple 
experiment. While walking comfortably with a friend, ask him to compute 
23 x 78 in his head, and to do so immediately. He will almost certainly stop 
in his tracks. My experience is that I can think while strolling but cannot 
engage in mental work that imposes a heavy load on short-term memory. If 
I must construct an intricate argument under time pressure, I would rather 
be still, and I would prefer sitting to standing. Of course, not all slow 
thinking requires that form of intense concentration and effortful 
computation—I did the best thinking of my life on leisurely walks with 
Amos. 

Accelerating beyond my strolling speed completely changes the 
experience of walking, because the transition to a faster walk brings about 
a sharp deterioration in my ability to think coherently. As I speed up, my 
attention is drawn with increasing frequency to the experience of walking 
and to the deliberate maintenance of the faster pace. My ability to bring a 
train of thought to a conclusion is impaired accordingly. At the highest 
speed I can sustain on the hills, about 14 minutes for a mile, I do not even 
try to think of anything else. In addition to the physical effort of moving my 



body rapidly along the path, a mental effort of self-control is needed to 
resist the urge to slow down. Self-control and deliberate thought apparently 
draw on the same limited budget of effort. 

For most of us, most of the time, the maintenance of a coherent train of 
thought and the occasional engagement in effortful thinking also require 
self-control. Although I have not conducted a systematic survey, I suspect 
that frequent switching of tasks and speeded-up mental work are not 
intrinsically pleasurable, and that people avoid them when possible. This is 
how the law of least effort comes to be a law. Even in the absence of time 
pressure, maintaining a coherent train of thought requires discipline. An 
observer of the number of times I look at e-mail or investigate the 
refrigerator during an hour of writing could wahene dd reasonably infer an 
urge to escape and conclude that keeping at it requires more self-control 
than I can readily muster. 

Fortunately, cognitive work is not always aversive, and people 
sometimes expend considerable effort for long periods of time without 
having to exert willpower. The psychologist Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi 
(pronounced six-cent-mihaly) has done more than anyone else to study this 
state of effortless attending, and the name he proposed for it, flow, has 
become part of the language. People who experience flow describe it as 
“a state of effortless concentration so deep that they lose their sense of 
time, of themselves, of their problems,” and their descriptions of the joy of 
that state are so compelling that Csikszentmihalyi has called it an “optimal 
experience.” Many activities can induce a sense of flow, from painting to 
racing motorcycles—and for some fortunate authors I know, even writing a 
book is often an optimal experience. Flow neatly separates the two forms 
of effort: concentration on the task and the deliberate control of attention. 
Riding a motorcycle at 150 miles an hour and playing a competitive game 
of chess are certainly very effortful. In a state of flow, however, maintaining 
focused attention on these absorbing activities requires no exertion of self- 
control, thereby freeing resources to be directed to the task at hand. 

The Busy and Depleted System 2 

It is now a well-established proposition that both self-control and cognitive 
effort are forms of mental work. Several psychological studies have shown 
that people who are simultaneously challenged by a demanding cognitive 
task and by a temptation are more likely to yield to the temptation. Imagine 
that you are asked to retain a list of seven digits for a minute or two. You 
are told that remembering the digits is your top priority. While your 
attention is focused on the digits, you are offered a choice between two 



desserts: a sinful chocolate cake and a virtuous fruit salad. The evidence 
suggests that you would be more likely to select the tempting chocolate 
cake when your mind is loaded with digits. System 1 has more influence 
on behavior when System 2 is busy, and it has a sweet tooth. 

People who are cognitively busy are also more likely to make selfish 
choices, use sexist language, and make superficial judgments in social 
situations. Memorizing and repeating digits loosens the hold of System 2 
on behavior, but of course cognitive load is not the only cause of 
weakened self-control. A few drinks have the same effect, as does a 
sleepless night. The self-control of morning people is impaired at night; the 
reverse is true of night people. Too much concern about how well one is 
doing in a task sometimes disrupts performance by loading short-term 
memory with pointless anxious thoughts. The conclusion is straightforward: 
self-control requires attention and effort. Another way of saying this is that 
controlling thoughts and behaviors is one of the tasks that System 2 
performs. 

A series of surprising experiments by the psychologist Roy Baumeister 
and his colleagues has shown conclusively that all variants of voluntary 
effort—cognitive, emotional, or physical—draw at least partly on a shared 
pool of mental energy. Their experiments involve successive rather than 
simultaneous tasks. 

Baumeister’s group has repeatedly found that an effort of will or self- 
control is tiring; if you have had to force yourself to do something, you are 
less willing or less able to exert self-control when the next challenge comes 
around. The phenomenon has been named ego depletion. In a typical 
demo thypical denstration, participants who are instructed to stifle their 
emotional reaction to an emotionally charged film will later perform poorly 
on a test of physical stamina—how long they can maintain a strong grip on 
a dynamometer in spite of increasing discomfort. The emotional effort in 
the first phase of the experiment reduces the ability to withstand the pain of 
sustained muscle contraction, and ego-depleted people therefore 
succumb more quickly to the urge to quit. In another experiment, people 
are first depleted by a task in which they eat virtuous foods such as 
radishes and celery while resisting the temptation to indulge in chocolate 
and rich cookies. Later, these people will give up earlier than normal when 
faced with a difficult cognitive task. 

The list of situations and tasks that are now known to deplete self-control 
is long and varied. All involve conflict and the need to suppress a natural 
tendency. They include: 

avoiding the thought of white bears 

inhibiting the emotional response to a stirring film 



making a series of choices that involve conflict 

trying to impress others 

responding kindly to a partner’s bad behavior 

interacting with a person of a different race (for prejudiced 

individuals) 

The list of indications of depletion is also highly diverse: 

deviating from one’s diet 
overspending on impulsive purchases 
reacting aggressively to provocation 
persisting less time in a handgrip task 

performing poorly in cognitive tasks and logical decision making 

The evidence is persuasive: activities that impose high demands on 
System 2 require self-control, and the exertion of self-control is depleting 
and unpleasant. Unlike cognitive load, ego depletion is at least in part a 
loss of motivation. After exerting self-control in one task, you do not feel 
like making an effort in another, although you could do it if you really had to. 
In several experiments, people were able to resist the effects of ego 
depletion when given a strong incentive to do so. In contrast, increasing 
effort is not an option when you must keep six digits in short-term memory 
while performing a task. Ego depletion is not the same mental state as 
cognitive busyness. 

The most surprising discovery made by Baumeister’s group shows, as 
he puts it, that the idea of mental energy is more than a mere metaphor. 
The nervous system consumes more glucose than most other parts of the 
body, and effortful mental activity appears to be especially expensive in the 
currency of glucose. When you are actively involved in difficult cognitive 
reasoning or engaged in a task that requires self-control, your blood 
glucose level drops. The effect is analogous to a runner who draws down 
glucose stored in her muscles during a sprint. The bold implication of this 
idea is that the effects of ego depletion could be undone by ingesting 
glucose, and Baumeister and his colleagues have confirmed this 
hypothesis n ohypothesiin several experiments. 

Volunteers in one of their studies watched a short silent film of a woman 
being interviewed and were asked to interpret her body language. While 
they were performing the task, a series of words crossed the screen in 
slow succession. The participants were specifically instructed to ignore the 
words, and if they found their attention drawn away they had to refocus their 
concentration on the woman’s behavior. This act of self-control was known 
to cause ego depletion. All the volunteers drank some lemonade before 



participating in a second task. The lemonade was sweetened with glucose 
for half of them and with Splenda for the others. Then all participants were 
given a task in which they needed to overcome an intuitive response to get 
the correct answer. Intuitive errors are normally much more frequent among 
ego-depleted people, and the drinkers of Splenda showed the expected 
depletion effect. On the other hand, the glucose drinkers were not 
depleted. Restoring the level of available sugar in the brain had prevented 
the deterioration of performance. It will take some time and much further 
research to establish whether the tasks that cause glucose-depletion also 
cause the momentary arousal that is reflected in increases of pupil size 
and heart rate. 

A disturbing demonstration of depletion effects in judgment was recently 
reported in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. The 
unwitting participants in the study were eight parole judges in Israel. They 
spend entire days reviewing applications for parole. The cases are 
presented in random order, and the judges spend little time on each one, 
an average of 6 minutes. (The default decision is denial of parole; only 
35% of requests are approved. The exact time of each decision is 
recorded, and the times of the judges’ three food breaks—morning break, 
lunch, and afternoon break—during the day are recorded as well.) The 
authors of the study plotted the proportion of approved requests against 
the time since the last food break. The proportion spikes after each meal, 
when about 65% of requests are granted. During the two hours or so until 
the judges’ next feeding, the approval rate drops steadily, to about zero just 
before the meal. As you might expect, this is an unwelcome result and the 
authors carefully checked many alternative explanations. The best possible 
account of the data provides bad news: tired and hungry judges tend to fall 
back on the easier default position of denying requests for parole. Both 
fatigue and hunger probably play a role. 

The Lazy System 2 

One of the main functions of System 2 is to monitor and control thoughts 
and actions “suggested” by System 1, allowing some to be expressed 
directly in behavior and suppressing or modifying others. 

For an example, here is a simple puzzle. Do not try to solve it but listen 
to your intuition: 

A bat and ball cost $1.10. 

The bat costs one dollar more than the ball. 

How much does the ball cost? 



A number came to your mind. The number, of course, is 10: 100. The 
distinctive mark of this easy puzzle is that it evokes an answer that is 
intuitive, appealing, and wrong. Do the math, and you will see. If the ball 
costs 100, then the total cost will be $1.20 (100 for the ball and $1.10 for 
the bat), not $1.10. The correct answer is 50. It%"&gt;50. is safe to assume 
that the intuitive answer also came to the mind of those who ended up with 
the correct number—they somehow managed to resist the intuition. 

Shane Frederick and I worked together on a theory of judgment based 
on two systems, and he used the bat-and-ball puzzle to study a central 
question: How closely does System 2 monitor the suggestions of System 
1? His reasoning was that we know a significant fact about anyone who 
says that the ball costs 100: that person did not actively check whether the 
answer was correct, and her System 2 endorsed an intuitive answer that it 
could have rejected with a small investment of effort. Furthermore, we also 
know that the people who give the intuitive answer have missed an obvious 
social cue; they should have wondered why anyone would include in a 
questionnaire a puzzle with such an obvious answer. A failure to check is 
remarkable because the cost of checking is so low: a few seconds of 
mental work (the problem is moderately difficult), with slightly tensed 
muscles and dilated pupils, could avoid an embarrassing mistake. People 
who say 100 appear to be ardent followers of the law of least effort. People 
who avoid that answer appear to have more active minds. 

Many thousands of university students have answered the bat-and-ball 
puzzle, and the results are shocking. More than 50% of students at 
Harvard, MIT, and Princeton ton gave the intuitive—incorrect—answer. At 
less selective universities, the rate of demonstrable failure to check was in 
excess of 80%. The bat-and-ball problem is our first encounter with an 
observation that will be a recurrent theme of this book: many people are 
overconfident, prone to place too much faith in their intuitions. They 
apparently find cognitive effort at least mildly unpleasant and avoid it as 
much as possible. 

Now I will show you a logical argument—two premises and a conclusion. 
Try to determine, as quickly as you can, if the argument is logically valid. 
Does the conclusion follow from the premises? 

All roses are flowers. 

Some flowers fade quickly. 

Therefore some roses fade quickly. 

A large majority of college students endorse this syllogism as valid. In fact 
the argument is flawed, because it is possible that there are no roses 
among the flowers that fade quickly. Just as in the bat-and-ball problem, a 



plausible answer comes to mind immediately. Overriding it requires hard 
work—the insistent idea that “it’s true, it’s true!” makes it difficult to check 
the logic, and most people do not take the trouble to think through the 
problem. 

This experiment has discouraging implications for reasoning in everyday 
life. It suggests that when people believe a conclusion is true, they are also 
very likely to believe arguments that appear to support it, even when these 
arguments are unsound. If System 1 is involved, the conclusion comes first 
and the arguments follow. 

Next, consider the following question and answer it quickly before 
reading on: 

How many murders occur in the state of Michigan in one year? 

The question, which was also devised by Shane Frederick, is again a 
challenge to System 2. The “trick” is whether the respondent will remember 
that Detroit, a high-crime c thigh-crimeity, is in Michigan. College students 
in the United States know this fact and will correctly identify Detroit as the 
largest city in Michigan. But knowledge of a fact is not all-or-none. Facts 
that we know do not always come to mind when we need them. People 
who remember that Detroit is in Michigan give higher estimates of the 
murder rate in the state than people who do not, but a majority of 
Frederick’s respondents did not think of the city when questioned about 
the state. Indeed, the average guess by people who were asked about 
Michigan is/oner than the guesses of a similar group who were asked 
about the murder rate in Detroit. 

Blame for a failure to think of Detroit can be laid on both System 1 and 
System 2. Whether the city comes to mind when the state is mentioned 
depends in part on the automatic function of memory. People differ in this 
respect. The representation of the state of Michigan is very detailed in 
some people’s minds: residents of the state are more likely to retrieve 
many facts about it than people who live elsewhere; geography buffs will 
retrieve more than others who specialize in baseball statistics; more 
intelligent individuals are more likely than others to have rich 
representations of most things. Intelligence is not only the ability to reason; 
it is also the ability to find relevant material in memory and to deploy 
attention when needed. Memory function is an attribute of System 1. 
However, everyone has the option of slowing down to conduct an active 
search of memory for all possibly relevant facts—-just as they could slow 
down to check the intuitive answer in the bat-and-ball problem. The extent 
of deliberate checking and search is a characteristic of System 2, which 
varies among individuals. 



The bat-and-ball problem, the flowers syllogism, and the 
Michigan/Detroit problem have something in common. Failing these 
minitests appears to be, at least to some extent, a matter of insufficient 
motivation, not trying hard enough. Anyone who can be admitted to a good 
university is certainly able to reason through the first two questions and to 
reflect about Michigan long enough to remember the major city in that state 
and its crime problem. These students can solve much more difficult 
problems when they are not tempted to accept a superficially plausible 
answer that comes readily to mind. The ease with which they are satisfied 
enough to stop thinking is rather troubling. “Lazy” is a harsh judgment about 
the self-monitoring of these young people and their System 2, but it does 
not seem to be unfair. Those who avoid the sin of intellectual sloth could be 
called “engaged.” They are more alert, more intellectually active, less 
willing to be satisfied with superficially attractive answers, more skeptical 
about their intuitions. The psychologist Keith Stanovich would call them 
more rational. 


Intelligence, Control, Rationality 

Researchers have applied diverse methods to examine the connection 
between thinking and self-control. Some have addressed it by asking the 
correlation question: If people were ranked by their self-control and by their 
cognitive aptitude, would individuals have similar positions in the two 
rankings? 

In one of the most famous experiments in the history of psychology, 
Walter Mischel and his students exposed four-year-old children to a cruel 
dilemma. They were given a choice between a small reward (one Oreo), 
which they could have at any time, or a larger reward (two cookies) for 
which they had to wait 15 minutes under difficult conditions. They were to 
remain alone in a room, facing a desk with two objects: a single cookie 
and a bell that the child could ring at any time to call in the experimenter 
and receiven oand recei the one cookie. As the experiment was 
described: “There were no toys, books, pictures, or other potentially 
distracting items in the room. The experimenter left the room and did not 
return until 15 min had passed or the child had rung the bell, eaten the 
rewards, stood up, or shown any signs of distress.” 

The children were watched through a one-way mirror, and the film that 
shows their behavior during the waiting time always has the audience 
roaring in laughter. About half the children managed the feat of waiting for 
15 minutes, mainly by keeping their attention away from the tempting 
reward. Ten or fifteen years later, a large gap had opened between those 



who had resisted temptation and those who had not. The resisters had 
higher measures of executive control in cognitive tasks, and especially the 
ability to reallocate their attention effectively. As young adults, they were 
less likely to take drugs. A significant difference in intellectual aptitude 
emerged: the children who had shown more self-control as four-year-olds 
had substantially higher scores on tests of intelligence. 

A team of researchers at the University of Oregon explored the link 
between cognitive control and intelligence in several ways, including an 
attempt to raise intelligence by improving the control of attention. During 
five 40-minute sessions, they exposed children aged four to six to various 
computer games especially designed to demand attention and control. In 
one of the exercises, the children used a joystick to track a cartoon cat and 
move it to a grassy area while avoiding a muddy area. The grassy areas 
gradually shrank and the muddy area expanded, requiring progressively 
more precise control. The testers found that training attention not only 
improved executive control; scores on nonverbal tests of intelligence also 
improved and the improvement was maintained for several months. Other 
research by the same group identified specific genes that are involved in 
the control of attention, showed that parenting techniques also affected this 
ability, and demonstrated a close connection between the children’s ability 
to control their attention and their ability to control their emotions. 

Shane Frederick constructed a Cognitive Reflection Test, which 
consists of the bat-and-ball problem and two other questions, chosen 
because they also invite an intuitive answer that is both compelling and 
wrong (the questions are shown here) . He went on to study the 
characteristics of students who score very low on this test—the supervisory 
function of System 2 is weak in these people—and found that they are 
prone to answer questions with the first idea that comes to mind and 
unwilling to invest the effort needed to check their intuitions. Individuals who 
uncritically follow their intuitions about puzzles are also prone to accept 
other suggestions from System 1. In particular, they are impulsive, 
impatient, and keen to receive immediate gratification. For example, 63% 
of the intuitive respondents say they would prefer to get $3,400 this month 
rather than $3,800 next month. Only 37% of those who solve all three 
puzzles correctly have the same shortsighted preference for receiving a 
smaller amount immediately. When asked how much they will pay to get 
overnight delivery of a book they have ordered, the low scorers on the 
Cognitive Reflection Test are willing to pay twice as much as the high 
scorers. Frederick’s findings suggest that the characters of our 
psychodrama have different “personalities.” System 1 is impulsive and 
intuitive; System 2 is capable of reasoning, and it is cautious, but at least 
for some people it is also lazy. We recognize related differences among 



individuals: some people are more like their System 2; others are closer to 
their System 1. This simple test has emerged as one of the better 
predictors of laztestors of ly thinking. 

Keith Stanovich and his longtime collaborator Richard West originally 
introduced the terms System 1 and System 2 (they now prefer to speak of 
Type 1 and Type 2 processes). Stanovich and his colleagues have spent 
decades studying differences among individuals in the kinds of problems 
with which this book is concerned. They have asked one basic question in 
many different ways: What makes some people more susceptible than 
others to biases of judgment? Stanovich published his conclusions in a 
book titled Rationality and the Reflective Mind, which offers a bold and 
distinctive approach to the topic of this chapter. He draws a sharp 
distinction between two parts of System 2—indeed, the distinction is so 
sharp that he calls them separate “minds.” One of these minds (he calls it 
algorithmic) deals with slow thinking and demanding computation. Some 
people are better than others in these tasks of brain power—they are the 
individuals who excel in intelligence tests and are able to switch from one 
task to another quickly and efficiently. However, Stanovich argues that high 
intelligence does not make people immune to biases. Another ability is 
involved, which he labels rationality. Stanovich’s concept of a rational 
person is similar to what I earlier labeled “engaged.” The core of his 
argument is that rationality should be distinguished from intelligence. In 
his view, superficial or “lazy” thinking is a flaw in the reflective mind, a 
failure of rationality. This is an attractive and thought-provoking idea. In 
support of it, Stanovich and his colleagues have found that the bat-and-ball 
question and others like it are somewhat better indicators of our 
susceptibility to cognitive errors than are conventional measures of 
intelligence, such as IQ tests. Time will tell whether the distinction between 
intelligence and rationality can lead to new discoveries. 

Speaking of Control 


“She did not have to struggle to stay on task for hours. She was in 
a state of flow" 


“His ego was depleted after a long day of meetings. So he just 
turned to standard operating procedures instead of thinking 
through the problem.” 



“He didn’t bother to check whether what he said made sense. 
Does he usually have a lazy System 2 or was he unusually tired?” 


“Unfortunately, she tends to say the first thing that comes into her 
mind. She probably also has trouble delaying gratification. Weak 
System 2.” 



The Associative Machine 


To begin your exploration of the surprising workings of System 1, look at 
the following words: 


Bananas Vomit 


A lot happened to you during the last second or two. You experienced 
some unpleasant images and memories. Your face twisted slightly in an 
expression of disgust, and you may have pushed this book imperceptibly 
farther away. Your heart rate increased, the hair on your arms rose a little, 
and your sweat glands were activated. In short, you responded to the 
disgusting word with an attenuated version of how you would react to the 
actual event. All of this was completely automatic, beyond your control. 

There was no particular reason to do so, but your mind automatically 
assumed a temporal sequence and a causal connection between the 
words bananas and vomit, forming a sketchy scenario in which bananas 
caused the sickness. As a result, you are experiencing a temporary 
aversion to bananas (don’t worry, it will pass). The state of your memory 
has changed in other ways: you are now unusually ready to recognize and 
respond to objects and concepts associated with “vomit,” such as sick, 
stink, or nausea, and words associated with “bananas,” such as yellow and 
fruit, and perhaps apple and berries. 

Vomiting normally occurs in specific contexts, such as hangovers and 
indigestion. You would also be unusually ready to recognize words 
associated with other causes of the same unfortunate outcome. 
Furthermore, your System 1 noticed the fact that the juxtaposition of the 
two words is uncommon; you probably never encountered it before. You 
experienced mild surprise. 

This complex constellation of responses occurred quickly, automatically, 
and effortlessly. \bu did not will it and you could not stop it. It was an 
operation of System 1. The events that took place as a result of your 
seeing the words happened by a process called associative activation: 
ideas that have been evoked trigger many other ideas, in a spreading 
cascade of activity in your brain. The essential feature of this complex set 
of mental events is its coherence. Each element is connected, and each 
supports and strengthens the others. The word evokes memories, which 
evoke emotions, which in turn evoke facial expressions and other 
reactions, such as a general tensing up and an avoidance tendency. The 



facial expression and the avoidance motion intensify the feelings to which 
they are linked, and the feelings in turn reinforce compatible ideas. All this 
happens quickly and all at once, yielding a self-reinforcing pattern of 
cognitive, emotional, and physical responses that is both diverse and 
integrated—it has been called associatively coherent. 

In a second or so you accomplished, automatically and unconsciously, a 
remarkable feat. Starting from a completely unexpected event, your 
System 1 made as much sense as possible of the situation—two simple 
words, oddly juxtaposed—by linking the words in a causal story; it 
evaluated the possible threat (mild to moderate) and created a context for 
future developments by preparing you for events that had just become 
more likely; it also created a context for the current event by evaluating how 
surprising it was. You ended up as informed about the past and as 
prepared for the future as you could be. 

An odd feature of what happened is that your System 1 treated the mere 
conjunction of two words as representations of reality. Your body reacted in 
an attenuated replica of a reaction to the real thing, and the emotional 
response and physical recoil were part of the interpretation of the event. As 
cognitive scientists have emphasized in recent years, cognition is 
embodied; you think with your body, not only with your brain. 

The mechanism that causes these mental events has been known for a 
long time: it is the ass12;velyociation of ideas. We all understand from 
experience that ideas follow each other in our conscious mind in a fairly 
orderly way. The British philosophers of the seventeenth and eighteenth 
centuries searched for the rules that explain such sequences. In An 
Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding, published in 1748, the 
Scottish philosopher David Hume reduced the principles of association to 
three: resemblance, contiguity in time and place, and causality. Our 
concept of association has changed radically since Hume’s days, but his 
three principles still provide a good start. 

I will adopt an expansive view of what an idea is. It can be concrete or 
abstract, and it can be expressed in many ways: as a verb, as a noun, as 
an adjective, or as a clenched fist. Psychologists think of ideas as nodes in 
a vast network, called associative memory, in which each idea is linked to 
many others. There are different types of links: causes are linked to their 
effects (virus—* cold); things to their properties (lime—* green); things to 
the categories to which they belong (banana —* fruit). One way we have 
advanced beyond Hume is that we no longer think of the mind as going 
through a sequence of conscious ideas, one at a time. In the current view 
of how associative memory works, a great deal happens at once. An idea 
that has been activated does not merely evoke one other idea. It activates 



many ideas, which in turn activate others. Furthermore, only a few of the 
activated ideas will register in consciousness; most of the work of 
associative thinking is silent, hidden from our conscious selves. The notion 
that we have limited access to the workings of our minds is difficult to 
accept because, naturally, it is alien to our experience, but it is true: you 
know far less about yourself than you feel you do. 

The Marvels of Priming 

As is common in science, the first big breakthrough in our understanding of 
the mechanism of association was an improvement in a method of 
measurement. Until a few decades ago, the only way to study associations 
was to ask many people questions such as, “What is the first word that 
comes to your mind when you hear the word DAY?” The researchers tallied 
the frequency of responses, such as “night,” “sunny,” or “long.” In the 1980s, 
psychologists discovered that exposure to a word causes immediate and 
measurable changes in the ease with which many related words can be 
evoked. If you have recently seen or heard the word EAT, you are 
temporarily more likely to complete the word fragment SO_P as SOUP 
than as SOAP. The opposite would happen, of course, if you had just seen 
WASH. We call this a priming effect and say that the idea of EAT primes 
the idea of SOUP, and that WASH primes SOAP. 

Priming effects take many forms. If the idea of EAT is currently on your 
mind (whether or not you are conscious of it), you will be quicker than usual 
to recognize the word SOUP when it is spoken in a whisper or presented 
in a blurry font. And of course you are primed not only for the idea of soup 
but also for a multitude of food-related ideas, including fork, hungry, fat, 
diet, and cookie. If for your most recent meal you sat at a wobbly restaurant 
table, you will be primed for wobbly as well. Furthermore, the primed ideas 
have some ability to prime other ideas, although more weakly. Like ripples 
on a pond, activation spreads through a small part of the vast network of 
associated ideas. The mapping of these ripples is now one of the most 
exciting pursuits in psychological research. 

Another major advance in our understanding of memory was the 
discovery that priming is not restricted to concepts and words. You cannot 
know this from conscious experience, of course, but you must accept the 
alien idea that your actions and your emotions can be primed by events of 
which you are not even aware. In an experiment that became an instant 
classic, the psychologist John Bargh and his collaborators asked students 
at New York University—most aged eighteen to twenty-two—to assemble 
four-word sentences from a set of five words (for example, “finds he it 



yellow instantly”). For one group of students, half the scrambled sentences 
contained words associated with the elderly, such as Florida, forgetful, 
bald, gray, or winkle. When they had completed that task, the young 
participants were sent out to do another experiment in an office down the 
hall. That short walk was what the experiment was about. The researchers 
unobtrusively measured the time it took people to get from one end of the 
corridor to the other. As Bargh had predicted, the young people who had 
fashioned a sentence from words with an elderly theme walked down the 
hallway significantly more slowly than the others. 

The “Florida effect” involves two stages of priming. First, the set of 
words primes thoughts of old age, though the word old is never mentioned; 
second, these thoughts prime a behavior, walking slowly, which is 
associated with old age. All this happens without any awareness. When 
they were questioned afterward, none of the students reported noticing that 
the words had had a common theme, and they all insisted that nothing they 
did after the first experiment could have been influenced by the words they 
had encountered. The idea of old age had not come to their conscious 
awareness, but their actions had changed nevertheless. This remarkable 
priming phenomenon—the influencing of an action by the idea—is known 
as the ideomotor effect. Although you surely were not aware of it, reading 
this paragraph primed you as well. If you had needed to stand up to get a 
glass of water, you would have been slightly slower than usual to rise from 
your chair—unless you happen to dislike the elderly, in which case 
research suggests that you might have been slightly faster than usual! 

The ideomotor link also works in reverse. A study conducted in a 
German university was the mirror image of the early experiment that Bargh 
and his colleagues had carried out in New York. Students were asked to 
walk around a room for 5 minutes at a rate of 30 steps per minute, which 
was about one-third their normal pace. After this brief experience, the 
participants were much quicker to recognize words related to old age, 
such as forgetful, old, and lonely. Reciprocal priming effects tend to 
produce a coherent reaction: if you were primed to think of old age, you 
would tend to act old, and acting old would reinforce the thought of old age. 

Reciprocal links are common in the associative network. For example, 
being amused tends to make you smile, and smiling tends to make you 
feel amused. Go ahead and take a pencil, and hold it between your teeth 
for a few seconds with the eraser pointing to your right and the point to your 
left. Now hold the pencil so the point is aimed straight in front of you, by 
pursing your lips around the eraser end. You were probably unaware that 
one of these actions forced your face into a frown and the other into a 
smile. College students were asked to rate the humor of cartoons from 



Gary Larson’s The Far Side while holding a pencil in their mouth. Those 
who were “smiling” (without any awareness of doing so) found the cartoons 
rri221; (withfunnier than did those who were “frowning.” In another 
experiment, people whose face was shaped into a frown (by squeezing 
their eyebrows together) reported an enhanced emotional response to 
upsetting pictures—starving children, people arguing, maimed accident 
victims. 

Simple, common gestures can also unconsciously influence our thoughts 
and feelings. In one demonstration, people were asked to listen to 
messages through new headphones. They were told that the purpose of 
the experiment was to test the quality of the audio equipment and were 
instructed to move their heads repeatedly to check for any distortions of 
sound. Half the participants were told to nod their head up and down while 
others were told to shake it side to side. The messages they heard were 
radio editorials. Those who nodded (a yes gesture) tended to accept the 
message they heard, but those who shook their head tended to reject it. 
Again, there was no awareness, just a habitual connection between an 
attitude of rejection or acceptance and its common physical expression. 
You can see why the common admonition to “act calm and kind regardless 
of how you feel” is very good advice: you are likely to be rewarded by 
actually feeling calm and kind. 

Primes That Guide Us 

Studies of priming effects have yielded discoveries that threaten our self- 
image as conscious and autonomous authors of our judgments and our 
choices. For instance, most of us think of voting as a deliberate act that 
reflects our values and our assessments of policies and is not influenced 
by irrelevancies. Our vote should not be affected by the location of the 
polling station, for example, but it is. A study of voting patterns in precincts 
of Arizona in 2000 showed that the support for propositions to increase the 
funding of schools was significantly greater when the polling station was in 
a school than when it was in a nearby location. A separate experiment 
showed that exposing people to images of classrooms and school lockers 
also increased the tendency of participants to support a school initiative. 
The effect of the images was larger than the difference between parents 
and other voters! The study of priming has come some way from the initial 
demonstrations that reminding people of old age makes them walk more 
slowly. We now know that the effects of priming can reach into every corner 
of our lives. 

Reminders of money produce some troubling effects. Participants in one 



experiment were shown a list of five words from which they were required 
to construct a four-word phrase that had a money theme (“high a salary 
desk paying” became “a high-paying salary”). Other primes were much 
more subtle, including the presence of an irrelevant money-related object 
in the background, such as a stack of Monopoly money on a table, or a 
computer with a screen saver of dollar bills floating in water. 

Money-primed people become more independent than they would be 
without the associative trigger. They persevered almost twice as long in 
trying to solve a very difficult problem before they asked the experimenter 
for help, a crisp demonstration of increased self-reliance. Money-primed 
people are also more selfish: they were much less willing to spend time 
helping another student who pretended to be confused about an 
experimental task. When an experimenter clumsily dropped a bunch of 
pencils on the floor, the participants with money (unconsciously) on their 
mind picked up fewer pencils. In another experiment in the series, 
participants were told that they would shortly have a get-acquainted 
conversation with another person and were asked to set up two chairs 
while the experimenter left to retrieve that person. Participants primed by 
money chose in the exto stay much farther apart than their nonprimed 
peers (118 vs. 80 centimeters). Money-primed undergraduates also 
showed a greater preference for being alone. 

The general theme of these findings is that the idea of money primes 
individualism: a reluctance to be involved with others, to depend on others, 
or to accept demands from others. The psychologist who has done this 
remarkable research, Kathleen Vohs, has been laudably restrained in 
discussing the implications of her findings, leaving the task to her readers. 
Her experiments are profound—her findings suggest that living in a culture 
that surrounds us with reminders of money may shape our behavior and 
our attitudes in ways that we do not know about and of which we may not 
be proud. Some cultures provide frequent reminders of respect, others 
constantly remind their members of God, and some societies prime 
obedience by large images of the Dear Leader. Can there be any doubt 
that the ubiquitous portraits of the national leader in dictatorial societies 
not only convey the feeling that “Big Brother Is Watching” but also lead to 
an actual reduction in spontaneous thought and independent action? 

The evidence of priming studies suggests that reminding people of their 
mortality increases the appeal of authoritarian ideas, which may become 
reassuring in the context of the terror of death. Other experiments have 
confirmed Freudian insights about the role of symbols and metaphors in 
unconscious associations. For example, consider the ambiguous word 

fragments W_H and S_P. People who were recently asked to think of 

an action of which they are ashamed are more likely to complete those 



fragments as WASH and SOAP and less likely to see WISH and SOUP. 
Furthermore, merely thinking about stabbing a coworker in the back leaves 
people more inclined to buy soap, disinfectant, or detergent than batteries, 
juice, or candy bars. Feeling that one’s soul is stained appears to trigger a 
desire to cleanse one’s body, an impulse that has been dubbed the “Lady 
Macbeth effect.” 

The cleansing is highly specific to the body parts involved in a sin. 
Participants in an experiment were induced to “lie” to an imaginary person, 
either on the phone or in e-mail. In a subsequent test of the desirability of 
various products, people who had lied on the phone preferred mouthwash 
over soap, and those who had lied in e-mail preferred soap to mouthwash. 

When I describe priming studies to audiences, the reaction is often 
disbelief. This is not a surprise: System 2 believes that it is in charge and 
that it knows the reasons for its choices. Questions are probably cropping 
up in your mind as well: How is it possible for such trivial manipulations of 
the context to have such large effects? Do these experiments demonstrate 
that we are completely at the mercy of whatever primes the environment 
provides at any moment? Of course not. The effects of the primes are 
robust but not necessarily large. Among a hundred voters, only a few 
whose initial preferences were uncertain will vote differently about a school 
issue if their precinct is located in a school rather than in a church—but a 
few percent could tip an election. 

The idea you should focus on, however, is that disbelief is not an option. 
The results are not made up, nor are they statistical flukes. \bu have no 
choice but to accept that the major conclusions of these studies are true. 
More important, you must accept that they are true about you. If you had 
been exposed to a screen saver of floating dollar bills, you too would likely 
have picked up fewer pencils to help a clumsy stranger. You do not believe 
that these results apply to you because they correspond to nothing in your 
subjective experience. But your subjective expefteelief. Trience consists 
largely of the story that your System 2 tells itself about what is going on. 
Priming phenomena arise in System 1, and you have no conscious access 
to them. 

I conclude with a perfect demonstration of a priming effect, which was 
conducted in an office kitchen at a British university. For many years 
members of that office had paid for the tea or coffee to which they helped 
themselves during the day by dropping money into an “honesty box.” A list 
of suggested prices was posted. One day a banner poster was displayed 
just above the price list, with no warning or explanation. For a period often 
weeks a new image was presented each week, either flowers or eyes that 
appeared to be looking directly at the observer. No one commented on the 



new decorations, but the contributions to the honesty box changed 
significantly. The posters and the amounts that people put into the cash 
box (relative to the amount they consumed) are shown in figure 4. They 
deserve a close look. 



Figure 4 


On the first week of the experiment (which you can see at the bottom of the 
figure), two wide-open eyes stare at the coffee or tea drinkers, whose 
average contribution was 70 pence per liter of milk. On week 2, the poster 
shows flowers and average contributions drop to about 15 pence. The 
trend continues. On average, the users of the kitchen contributed almost 
three times as much in “eye weeks” as they did in “flower weeks.” 
Evidently, a purely symbolic reminder of being watched prodded people 
into improved behavior. As we expect at this point, the effect occurs 
without any awareness. Do you now believe that you would also fall into the 
same pattern? 

Some years ago, the psychologist Timothy Wilson wrote a book with the 
evocative title Strangers to Ourselves. You have now been introduced to 
that stranger in you, which may be in control of much of what you do, 
although you rarely have a glimpse of it. System 1 provides the 
impressions that often turn into your beliefs, and is the source of the 
impulses that often become your choices and your actions. It offers a tacit 
interpretation of what happens to you and around you, linking the present 




with the recent past and with expectations about the near future. It contains 
the model of the world that instantly evaluates events as normal or 
surprising. It is the source of your rapid and often precise intuitive 
judgments. And it does most of this without your conscious awareness of 
its activities. System 1 is also, as we will see in the following chapters, the 
origin of many of the systematic errors in your intuitions. 

Speaking of Priming 


“The sight of all these people in uniforms does not prime 
creativity.” 


“The world makes much less sense than you think. The 
coherence comes mostly from the way your mind works.” 


“They were primed to find flaws, and this is exactly what they 
found.” 


“His System 1 constructed a story, and his System 2 believed it. It 
happens to allel 


“I made myself smile and I’m actually feeling better!” 



Cognitive Ease 


Whenever you are conscious, and perhaps even when you are not, multiple 
computations are going on in your brain, which maintain and update 
current answers to some key questions: Is anything new going on? Is there 
a threat? Are things going well? Should my attention be redirected? Is 
more effort needed for this task? You can think of a cockpit, with a set of 
dials that indicate the current values of each of these essential variables. 
The assessments are carried out automatically by System 1, and one of 
their functions is to determine whether extra effort is required from System 
2 . 

One of the dials measures cognitive ease, and its range is between 
“Easy” and “Strained." Easy is a sign that things are going well—no 
threats, no major news, no need to redirect attention or mobilize effort. 
Strained indicates that a problem exists, which will require increased 
mobilization of System 2. Conversely, you experience cognitive strain. 
Cognitive strain is affected by both the current level of effort and the 
presence of unmet demands. The surprise is that a single dial of cognitive 
ease is connected to a large network of diverse inputs and outputs. Figure 
5 tells the story. 

The figure suggests that a sentence that is printed in a clear font, or has 
been repeated, or has been primed, will be fluently processed with 
cognitive ease. Hearing a speaker when you are in a good mood, or even 
when you have a pencil stuck crosswise in your mouth to make you “smile,” 
also induces cognitive ease. Conversely, you experience cognitive strain 
when you read instructions in a poor font, or in faint colors, or worded in 
complicated language, or when you are in a bad mood, and even when you 
frown. 



Figure 5. Causes and Consequences of 
Cognitive Ease 
























The various causes of ease or strain have interchangeable effects. 
When you are in a state of cognitive ease, you are probably in a good 
mood, like what you see, believe what you hear, trust your intuitions, and 
feel that the current situation is comfortably familiar. You are also likely to 
be relatively casual and superficial in your thinking. When you feel strained, 
you are more likely to be vigilant and suspicious, invest more effort in what 
you are doing, feel less comfortable, and make fewer errors, but you also 
are less intuitive and less creative than usual. 

Illusions of Remembering 

The word illusion brings visual illusions to mind, because we are all 
familiar with pictures that mislead. But vision is not the only domain of 
illusions; memory is also susceptible to them, as is thinking more 
generally. 

David Stenbili, Monica Bigoutski, Sh"imight=s is pictana Tirana. I just 
made up these names. If you encounter any of them within the next few 
minutes you are likely to remember where you saw them. You know, and 
will know for a while, that these are not the names of minor celebrities. But 
suppose that a few days from now you are shown a long list of names, 
including some minor celebrities and “new” names of people that you have 
never heard of; your task will be to check every name of a celebrity in the 
list. There is a substantial probability that you will identify David Stenbili as 
a well-known person, although you will not (of course) know whether you 
encountered his name in the context of movies, sports, or politics. Larry 
Jacoby, the psychologist who first demonstrated this memory illusion in the 
laboratory, 
titled his article “Becoming Famous Overnight.” How does this 
happen? Start by asking yourself how you know whether or not someone is 
famous. In some cases of truly famous people (or of celebrities in an area 
you follow), you have a mental file with rich information about a person— 
think Albert Einstein, Bono, Hillary Clinton. But you will have no file of 
information about David Stenbili if you encounter his name in a few days. 
All you will have is a sense of familiarity—you have seen this name 
somewhere. 

Jacoby nicely stated the problem: “The experience of familiarity has a 
simple but powerful quality of ‘pastness’ that seems to indicate that it is a 
direct reflection of prior experience.” This quality of pastness is an illusion. 
The truth is, as Jacoby and many followers have shown, that the name 
David Stenbili will look familiar when you see it because you will see it 
more clearly. Words that you have seen before become easier to see 



again—you can identify them better than other words when they are shown 
very briefly or masked by noise, and you will be quicker (by a few 
hundredths of a second) to read them than to read other words. In short, 
you experience greater cognitive ease in perceiving a word you have seen 
earlier, and it is this sense of ease that gives you the impression of 
familiarity. 

Figure 5 suggests a way to test this. Choose a completely new word, 
make it easier to see, and it will be more likely to have the quality of 
pastness. Indeed, a new word is more likely to be recognized as familiar if 
it is unconsciously primed by showing it for a few milliseconds just before 
the test, or if it is shown in sharper contrast than some other words in the 
list. The link also operates in the other direction. Imagine you are shown a 
list of words that are more or less out of focus. Some of the words are 
severely blurred, others less so, and your task is to identify the words that 
are shown more clearly. A word that you have seen recently will appear to 
be clearer than unfamiliar words. As figure 5 indicates, the various ways of 
inducing cognitive ease or strain are interchangeable; you may not know 
precisely what it is that makes things cognitively easy or strained. This is 
how the illusion of familiarity comes about. 

Illusions of Truth 

“New York is a large city in the United States.” “The moon revolves around 
Earth.” “A chicken has four legs.” In all these cases, you quickly retrieved a 
great deal of related information, almost all pointing one way or another. 
You knew soon after reading them that the first two statements are true and 
the last one is false. Note, however, that the statement “A chicken has 
three legs” is more obviously false than “A chicken has four legs.” Your 
associative machinery slows the judgment of the latter sentence by 
delivering the fact that many animals have four legs, and perhaps also that 
supermarkets often sell chickenordblurred, legs in packages of four. 
System 2 was involved in sifting that information, perhaps raising the issue 
of whether the question about New Y)rk was too easy, or checking the 
meaning of revolves. 

Think of the last time you took a driving test. Is it true that you need a 
special license to drive a vehicle that weighs more than three tons? 
Perhaps you studied seriously and can remember the side of the page on 
which the answer appeared, as well as the logic behind it. This is certainly 
not how I passed driving tests when I moved to a new state. My practice 
was to read the booklet of rules quickly once and hope for the best. I knew 
some of the answers from the experience of driving for a long time. But 



there were questions where no good answer came to mind, where all I had 
to go by was cognitive ease. If the answer felt familiar, I assumed that it 
was probably true. If it looked new (or improbably extreme), I rejected it. 
The impression of familiarity is produced by System 1, and System 2 
relies on that impression for a true/false judgment. 

The lesson of figure 5 is that predictable illusions inevitably occur if a 
judgment is based on an impression of cognitive ease or strain. Anything 
that makes it easier for the associative machine to run smoothly will also 
bias beliefs. A reliable way to make people believe in falsehoods is 
frequent repetition, because familiarity is not easily distinguished from 
truth. Authoritarian institutions and marketers have always known this fact. 
But it was psychologists who discovered that you do not have to repeat the 
entire statement of a fact or idea to make it appear true. People who were 
repeatedly exposed to the phrase “the body temperature of a chicken” 
were more likely to accept as true the statement that “the body temperature 
of a chicken is 144°” (or any other arbitrary number). The familiarity of one 
phrase in the statement sufficed to make the whole statement feel familiar, 
and therefore true. If you cannot remember the source of a statement, and 
have no way to relate it to other things you know, you have no option but to 
go with the sense of cognitive ease. 

Howto Write a Persuasive Message 

Suppose you must write a message that you want the recipients to believe. 
Of course, your message will be true, but that is not necessarily enough for 
people to believe that it is true. It is entirely legitimate for you to enlist 
cognitive ease to work in your favor, and studies of truth illusions provide 
specific suggestions that may help you achieve this goal. 

The general principle is that anything you can do to reduce cognitive 
strain will help, so you should first maximize legibility. Compare these two 
statements: 

Adolf Hitler was born in 1892. 

Adolf Hitler was born in 1887. 

Both are false (Hitler was born in 1889), but experiments have shown that 
the first is more likely to be believed. More advice: if your message is to be 
printed, use high-quality paper to maximize the contrast between 
characters and their background. If you use color, you are more likely to be 
believed if your text is printed in bright blue or red than in middling shades 
of green, yellow, or pale blue. 



If you care about being thought credible and intelligent, do not use 
complex language where simpler language will do. My Princeton ton 
colleague Danny Oppenheimer refuted a myth prevalent a wo ton colmong 
undergraduates about the vocabulary that professors find most impressive. 
In an article titled “Consequences of Erudite Vernacular Utilized 
Irrespective of Necessity: Problems with Using Long Words Needlessly,” 
he showed that couching familiar ideas in pretentious language is taken as 
a sign of poor intelligence and low credibility. 

In addition to making your message simple, try to make it memorable. 
Put your ideas in verse if you can; they will be more likely to be taken as 
truth. Participants in a much cited experiment read dozens of unfamiliar 
aphorisms, such as: 

Woes unite foes. 

Little strokes will tumble great oaks. 

A fault confessed is half redressed. 

Other students read some of the same proverbs transformed into 
nonrhyming versions: 

Woes unite enemies. 

Little strokes will tumble great trees. 

A fault admitted is half redressed. 

The aphorisms were judged more insightful when they rhymed than when 
they did not. 

Finally, if you quote a source, choose one with a name that is easy to 
pronounce. Participants in an experiment were asked to evaluate the 
prospects of fictitious Turkish companies on the basis of reports from two 
brokerage firms. For each stock, one of the reports came from an easily 
pronounced name (e.g., Artan) and the other report came from a firm with 
an unfortunate name (e.g., Taahhut). The reports sometimes disagreed. 
The best procedure for the observers would have been to average the two 
reports, but this is not what they did. They gave much more weight to the 
report from Artan than to the report from Taahhut. Remember that System 
2 is lazy and that mental effort is aversive. If possible, the recipients of your 
message want to stay away from anything that reminds them of effort, 
including a source with a complicated name. 

All this is very good advice, but we should not get carried away. High- 
quality paper, bright colors, and rhyming or simple language will not be 
much help if your message is obviously nonsensical, or if it contradicts 
facts that your audience knows to be true. The psychologists who do these 



experiments do not believe that people are stupid or infinitely gullible. What 
psychologists do believe is that all of us live much of our life guided by the 
impressions of System 1—and we often do not know the source of these 
impressions. How do you know that a statement is true? If it is strongly 
linked by logic or association to other beliefs or preferences you hold, or 
comes from a source you trust and like, you will feel a sense of cognitive 
ease. The trouble is that there may be other causes for your feeling of ease 
—including the quality of the font and the appealing rhythm of the prose— 
and you have no simple way of tracing your feelings to their source. This is 
the message of figure 5: the sense of ease or strain has multiple causes, 
and it is difficult to tease them apart. Difficult, but not impossible. People 
can overcome some of the superficial factors that produce illusions of truth 
when strongly motivated to do so. On most occasions, however, the lazy 
System 2 will adopt the suggestions of System 1 and march on. 

Strain and Effort 

The symmetry of many associative connections was a dominant theme in 
the discussion of associative coherence. As we saw earlier, people who 
are made to “smile” or “frown” by sticking a pencil in their mouth or holding 
a ball between their furrowed brows are prone to experience the emotions 
that frowning and smiling normally express. The same self-reinforcing 
reciprocity is found in studies of cognitive ease. On the one hand, cognitive 
strain is experienced when the effortful operations of System 2 are 
engaged. On the other hand, the experience of cognitive strain, whatever 
its source, tends to mobilize System 2, shifting people’s approach to 
problems from a casual intuitive mode to a more engaged and analytic 
mode. 

The bat-and-ball problem was mentioned earlier as a test of people’s 
tendency to answer questions with the first idea that comes to their mind, 
without checking it. Shane Frederick’s Cognitive Reflection Test consists 
of the bat-and-ball problem and two others, all chosen because they evoke 
an immediate intuitive answer that is incorrect. The other two items in the 
CRT are: 


If it takes 5 machines 5 minutes to make 5 widgets, how long 
would it take 100 machines to make 100 widgets? 

100 minutes OR 5 minutes 


In a lake, there is a patch of lily pads. Every day, the patch 
doubles in size. 



If it takes 48 days for the patch to cover the entire lake, how long 
would it take for the patch to cover half of the lake? 

24 days OR 47 days 

The correct answers to both problems are in a footnote at the bottom of the 
pager The experimenters recruited 40 Princeton students to take the CRT 
Half of them saw the puzzles in a small font in washed-out gray print. The 
puzzles were legible, but the font induced cognitive strain. The results tell a 
clear story: 90% of the students who saw the CRT in normal font made at 
least one mistake in the test, but the proportion dropped to 35% when the 
font was barely legible. You read this correctly: performance was better 
with the bad font. Cognitive strain, whatever its source, mobilizes System 
2, which is more likely to reject the intuitive answer suggested by System 
1 . 


The Pleasure of Cognitive Ease 

An article titled “Mind at Ease Puts a Smile on the Face” describes an 
experiment in which participants were briefly shown pictures of objects. 
Some of these pictures were made easier to recognize by showing the 
outline of the object just before the complete image was shown, so briefly 
that the contours were never noticed. Emotional reactions were measured 
by recording electrical impulses from facial muscles, registering changes 
of expression that are too slight and too brief to be detectable by 
observers. As expected, people showed a faint smile and relaxed brows 
when the pictures were easier to see. It appears to be a feature of System 
1 that cognitive ease is associated with good feelings. 

As expected, easily pronounced words evoke a favorable attitude. 
Companies with pronounceable names dmisorrectlo better than others for 
the first week after the stock is issued, though the effect disappears over 
time. Stocks with pronounceable trading symbols (like KAR or LUNMOO) 
outperform those with tongue-twisting tickers like PXG or RDO—and they 
appear to retain a small advantage over some time. A study conducted in 
Switzerland found that investors believe that stocks with fluent names like 
Emmi, Swissfirst, and Comet will earn higher returns than those with clunky 
labels like Geberitand Ypsomed. 

As we saw in figure 5, repetition induces cognitive ease and a 
comforting feeling of familiarity. The famed psychologist Robert Zajonc 
dedicated much of his career to the study of the link between the repetition 
of an arbitrary stimulus and the mild affection that people eventually have 
for it. Zajonc called it the mere exposure effect. A demonstration 


conducted in the student newspapers of the University of Michigan and of 
Michigan State University is one of my favorite experiments. For a period 
of some weeks, an ad-like box appeared on the front page of the paper, 
which contained one of the following Turkish (or Turkish-sounding) words: 
kadirga, saricik, bimnjni, nansoma, and iktitaf. The frequency with which 
the words were repeated varied: one of the words was shown only once, 
the others appeared on two, five, ten, or twenty-five separate occasions. 
(The words that were presented most often in one of the university papers 
were the least frequent in the other.) No explanation was offered, and 
readers’ queries were answered by the statement that “the purchaser of 
the display wished for anonymity.” 

When the mysterious series of ads ended, the investigators sent 
questionnaires to the university communities, asking for impressions of 
whether each of the words “means something ‘good’ or something ‘bad.’” 
The results were spectacular: the words that were presented more 
frequently were rated much more favorably than the words that had been 
shown only once or twice. The finding has been confirmed in many 
experiments, using Chinese ideographs, faces, and randomly shaped 
polygons. 

The mere exposure effect does not depend on the conscious 
experience of familiarity. In fact, the effect does not depend on 
consciousness at all: it occurs even when the repeated words or pictures 
are shown so quickly that the observers never become aware of having 
seen them. They still end up liking the words or pictures that were 
presented more frequently. As should be clear by now, System 1 can 
respond to impressions of events of which System 2 is unaware. Indeed, 
the mere exposure effect is actually stronger for stimuli that the individual 
never consciously sees. 

Zajonc argued that the effect of repetition on liking is a profoundly 
important biological fact, and that it extends to all animals. To survive in a 
frequently dangerous world, an organism should react cautiously to a novel 
stimulus, with withdrawal and fear. Survival prospects are poor for an 
animal that is not suspicious of novelty. However, it is also adaptive for the 
initial caution to fade if the stimulus is actually safe. The mere exposure 
effect occurs, Zajonc claimed, because the repeated exposure of a 
stimulus is followed by nothing bad. Such a stimulus will eventually become 
a safety signal, and safety is good. Obviously, this argument is not 
restricted to humans. To make that point, one of Zajonc’s associates 
exposed two sets of fertile chicken eggs to different tones. After they 
hatched, the chicks consistently emitted fewer distress calls when exposed 
to the tone they had heard while inhabiting the shell. 

Zajonc offered an eloquent summary of hinq icts proqram of research: 



The consequences of repeated exposures benefit the organism 
in its relations to the immediate animate and inanimate 
environment. They allow the organism to distinguish objects and 
habitats that are safe from those that are not, and they are the 
most primitive basis of social attachments. Therefore, they form 
the basis for social organization and cohesion—the basic 
sources of psychological and social stability. 

The link between positive emotion and cognitive ease in System 1 has a 
long evolutionary history. 

Ease, Mood, and Intuition 

Around 1960, a young psychologist named Sarnoff Mednick thought he 
had identified the essence of creativity. His idea was as simple as it was 
powerful: creativity is associative memory that works exceptionally well. He 
made up a test, called the Remote Association Test (RAT), which is still 
often used in studies of creativity. 

For an easy example, consider the following three words: 

cottage Swiss cake 

Can you think of a word that is associated with all three? You probably 
worked out that the answer is cheese. Now try this: 

dive light rocket 

This problem is much harder, but it has a unique correct answer, which 
every speaker of English recognizes, although less than 20% of a sample 
of students found it within 15 seconds. The answer is sky. Of course, not 
every triad of words has a solution. For example, the words dream, ball, 
book do not have a shared association that everyone will recognize as 
valid. 

Several teams of German psychologists that have studied the RAT in 
recent years have come up with remarkable discoveries about cognitive 
ease. One of the teams raised two questions: Can people feel that a triad 
of words has a solution before they know what the solution is? How does 
mood influence performance in this task? To find out, they first made some 
of their subjects happy and others sad, by asking them to think for several 
minutes about happy or sad episodes in their lives. Then they presented 
these subjects with a series of triads, half of them linked (such as dive, 
light, rocket) and half unlinked (such as dream, ball, book), and instructed 
them to press one of two keys very quickly to indicate their guess about 
whether the triad was linked. The time allowed for this guess, 2 seconds, 


was much too short for the actual solution to come to anyone’s mind. 

The first surprise is that people’s guesses are much more accurate than 
they would be by chance. I find this astonishing. A sense of cognitive ease 
is apparently generated by a very faint signal from the associative 
machine, which “knows” that the three words are coherent (share an 
association) long before the association is retrieved. The role of cognitive 
ease in the judgment was confirmed experimentally by another German 
team: manipulations that increase cognitive ease (priming, a clear font, 
pre-exposing words) all increase the tendency to see the words as linked. 

Another remarkable discovery is the powerful effect of mood on this 
intuitive performance. The experimentershape tende computed an 
“intuition index” to measure accuracy. They found that putting the 
participants in a good mood before the test by having them think happy 
thoughts more than doubled accuracy. An even more striking result is that 
unhappy subjects were completely incapable of performing the intuitive 
task accurately; their guesses were no better than random. Mood evidently 
affects the operation of System 1: when we are uncomfortable and 
unhappy, we lose touch with our intuition. 

These findings add to the growing evidence that good mood, intuition, 
creativity, gullibility, and increased reliance on System 1 form a cluster. At 
the other pole, sadness, vigilance, suspicion, an analytic approach, and 
increased effort also go together. A happy mood loosens the control of 
System 2 over performance: when in a good mood, people become more 
intuitive and more creative but also less vigilant and more prone to logical 
errors. Here again, as in the mere exposure effect, the connection makes 
biological sense. A good mood is a signal that things are generally going 
well, the environment is safe, and it is all right to let one’s guard down. A 
bad mood indicates that things are not going very well, there may be a 
threat, and vigilance is required. Cognitive ease is both a cause and a 
consequence of a pleasant feeling. 

The Remote Association Test has more to tell us about the link between 
cognitive ease and positive affect. Briefly consider two triads of words: 
sleep mail switch 
salt deep foam 

You could not know it, of course, but measurements of electrical activity in 
the muscles of your face would probably have shown a slight smile when 
you read the second triad, which is coherent (sea is the solution). This 
smiling reaction to coherence appears in subjects who are told nothing 
about common associates; they are merely shown a vertically arranged 
triad of words and instructed to press the space bar after they have read it. 
The impression of cognitive ease that comes with the presentation of a 
coherent triad appears to be mildly pleasurable in itself. 



The evidence that we have about good feelings, cognitive ease, and the 
intuition of coherence is, as scientists say, correlational but not necessarily 
causal. Cognitive ease and smiling occur together, but do the good 
feelings actually lead to intuitions of coherence? Yes, they do. The proof 
comes from a clever experimental approach that has become increasingly 
popular. Some participants were given a cover story that provided an 
alternative interpretation for their good feeling: they were told about music 
played in their earphones that “previous research showed that this music 
influences the emotional reactions of individuals.” This story completely 
eliminates the intuition of coherence. The finding shows that the brief 
emotional response that follows the presentation of a triad of words 
(pleasant if the triad is coherent, unpleasant otherwise) is actually the basis 
of judgments of coherence. There is nothing here that System 1 cannot do. 
Emotional changes are now expected, and because they are unsurprising 
they are not linked causally to the words. 

This is as good as psychological research ever gets, in its combination 
of experimental techniques and in its results, which are both robust and 
extremely surprising. We have learned a great deal about the automatic 
workings of System 1 in the last decades. Much of what we now know 
would have sounded like science fiction thirty or forty years ago. It was 
beyond imagining that bad font influences judgments of truth and improves 
cognitive performance, or that an emotional response to the cognitive 
ease of a tri pr that aad of words mediates impressions of coherence. 
Psychology has come a long way. 

Speaking of Cognitive Ease 


“Let’s not dismiss their business plan just because the font 
makes it hard to read.” 


“We must be inclined to believe it because it has been repeated 
so often, but let’s think it through again.” 


“Familiarity breeds liking. This is a mere exposure effect.” 


“I’m in a very good mood today, and my System 2 is weaker than 
usual. I should be extra careful.” 



Norms, Surprises, and Causes 


The central characteristics and functions of System 1 and System 2 have 
now been introduced, with a more detailed treatment of System 1. Freely 
mixing metaphors, we have in our head a remarkably powerful computer, 
not fast by conventional hardware standards, but able to represent the 
structure of our world by various types of associative links in a vast network 
of various types of ideas. The spreading of activation in the associative 
machine is automatic, but we (System 2) have some ability to control the 
search of memory, and also to program it so that the detection of an event 
in the environment can attract attention. We next go into more detail of the 
wonders and limitation of what System 1 can do. 

Assessing Normality 

The main function of System 1 is to maintain and update a model of your 
personal world, which represents what is normal in it. The model is 
constructed by associations that link ideas of circumstances, events, 
actions, and outcomes that co-occur with some regularity, either at the 
same time or within a relatively short interval. As these links are formed 
and strengthened, the pattern of associated ideas comes to represent the 
structure of events in your life, and it determines your interpretation of the 
present as well as your expectations of the future. 

A capacity for surprise is an essential aspect of our mental life, and 
surprise itself is the most sensitive indication of how we understand our 
world and what we expect from it. There are two main varieties of surprise. 
Some expectations are active and conscious—you know you are waiting 
for a particular event to happen. When the hour is near, you may be 
expecting the sound of the door as your child returns from school; when the 
door opens you expect the sound of a familiar voice. \bu will be surprised 
if an actively expected event does not occur. But there is a much larger 
category of events that you expect passively; you don’t wait for them, but 
you are not surprised when they happen. These are events that are normal 
in a situation, though not sufficiently probable to be actively expected. 

A single incident may make a recurrence less surprising. Some years 
ago, my wife and I were of dealWhen normvacationing in a small island 
resort on the Great Barrier Reef. There are only forty guest rooms on the 
island. When we came to dinner, we were surprised to meet an 
acquaintance, a psychologist named Jon. We greeted each other warmly 
and commented on the coincidence. Jon left the resort the next day. About 
two weeks later, we were in a theater in London. A latecomer sat next to 



me after the lights went down. When the lights came up for the 
intermission, I saw that my neighbor was Jon. My wife and I commented 
later that we were simultaneously conscious of two facts: first, this was a 
more remarkable coincidence than the first meeting: second, we were 
distinctly less surprised to meet Jon on the second occasion than we had 
been on the first. Evidently, the first meeting had somehow changed the 
idea of Jon in our minds. He was now “the psychologist who shows up 
when we travel abroad.” We (System 2) knew this was a ludicrous idea, 
but our System 1 had made it seem almost normal to meet Jon in strange 
places. We would have experienced much more surprise if we had met 
any acquaintance other than Jon in the next seat of a London theater. By 
any measure of probability, meeting Jon in the theater was much less likely 
than meeting any one of our hundreds of acquaintances—yet meeting Jon 
seemed more normal. 

Under some conditions, passive expectations quickly turn active, as we 
found in another coincidence. On a Sunday evening some years ago, we 
were driving from New York City to Princeton, as we had been doing every 
week for a long time. We saw an unusual sight: a car on fire by the side of 
the road. When we reached the same stretch of road the following Sunday, 
another car was burning there. Here again, we found that we were distinctly 
less surprised on the second occasion than we had been on the first. This 
was now “the place where cars catch fire.” Because the circumstances of 
the recurrence were the same, the second incident was sufficient to create 
an active expectation: for months, perhaps for years, after the event we 
were reminded of burning cars whenever we reached that spot of the road 
and were quite prepared to see another one (but of course we never did). 

The psychologist Dale Miller and I wrote an essay in which we attempted 
to explain how events come to be perceived as normal or abnormal. I will 
use an example from our description of “norm theory,” although my 
interpretation of it has changed slightly: 

An observer, casually watching the patrons at a neighboring table 
in a fashionable restaurant, notices that the first guest to taste the 
soup winces, as if in pain. The normality of a multitude of events 
will be altered by this incident. It is now unsurprising for the guest 
who first tasted the soup to startle violently when touched by a 
waiter: it is also unsurprising for another guest to stifle a cry when 
tasting soup from the same tureen. These events and many 
others appear more normal than they would have otherwise, but 
not necessarily because they confirm advance expectations. 
Rather, they appear normal because they recruit the original 
episode, retrieve it from memory, and are interpreted in 



conjunction with it. 


Imagine yourself the observer at the restaurant. You were surprised by 
the first guest’s unusual reaction to the soup, and surprised again by the 
startled response to the waiter’s touch. However, the second abnormal 
event will retrieve the first from memory, and both make sense together. 
The two events fit into a pattern, in which the guest is an exceptionally 
tense person. On the other hand, if the next thing that happens after the first 
guest’s grimace is that another customer rejects the soup, these two 
surprises will be linked and thehinsur soup will surely be blamed. 

“How many animals of each kind did Moses take into the ark?” The 
number of people who detect what is wrong with this question is so small 
that it has been dubbed the “Moses illusion.” Moses took no animals into 
the ark; Noah did. Like the incident of the wincing soup eater, the Moses 
illusion is readily explained by norm theory. The idea of animals going into 
the ark sets up a biblical context, and Moses is not abnormal in that 
context. You did not positively expect him, but the mention of his name is 
not surprising. It also helps that Moses and Noah have the same vowel 
sound and number of syllables. As with the triads that produce cognitive 
ease, you unconsciously detect associative coherence between “Moses” 
and “ark” and so quickly accept the question. Replace Moses with George 
W. Bush in this sentence and you will have a poor political joke but no 
illusion. 

When something cement does not fit into the current context of activated 
ideas, the system detects an abnormality, as you just experienced. You 
had no particular idea of what was coming after something, but you knew 
when the word cement came that it was abnormal in that sentence. 
Studies of brain responses have shown that violations of normality are 
detected with astonishing speed and subtlety. In a recent experiment, 
people heard the sentence “Earth revolves around the trouble every year.” 
A distinctive pattern was detected in brain activity, starting within two- 
tenths of a second of the onset of the odd word. Even more remarkable, 
the same brain response occurs at the same speed when a male voice 
says, “I believe I am pregnant because I feel sick every morning,” or when 
an upper-class voice says, “I have a large tattoo on my back.” A vast 
amount of world knowledge must instantly be brought to bear for the 
incongruity to be recognized: the voice must be identified as upper-class 
English and confronted with the generalization that large tattoos are 
uncommon in the upper class. 

We are able to communicate with each other because our knowledge of 
the world and our use of words are largely shared. When I mention a table, 



without specifying further, you understand that I mean a normal table. You 
know with certainty that its surface is approximately level and that it has far 
fewer than 25 legs. We have norms for a vast number of categories, and 
these norms provide the background for the immediate detection of 
anomalies such as pregnant men and tattooed aristocrats. 

To appreciate the role of norms in communication, consider the 
sentence “The large mouse climbed over the trunk of the very small 
elephant.” I can count on your having norms for the size of mice and 
elephants that are not too far from mine. The norms specify a typical or 
average size for these animals, and they also contain information about the 
range or variability within the category. It is very unlikely that either of us got 
the image in our mind’s eye of a mouse larger than an elephant striding 
over an elephant smaller than a mouse. Instead, we each separately but 
jointly visualized a mouse smaller than a shoe clambering over an elephant 
larger than a sofa. System 1, which understands language, has access to 
norms of categories, which specify the range of plausible values as well as 
the most typical cases. 

Seeing Causes and Intentions 

“Fred’s parents arrived late. The caterers were expected soon. Fred was 
angry.” You know why Fred was angry, and it is not because the caterers 
were expected soon. In your network of associationsmals in co, anger and 
lack of punctuality are linked as an effect and its possible cause, but there 
is no such link between anger and the idea of expecting caterers. A 
coherent story was instantly constructed as you read; you immediately 
knew the cause of Fred’s anger. Finding such causal connections is part of 
understanding a story and is an automatic operation of System 1. System 
2, your conscious self, was offered the causal interpretation and accepted 
it. 

A story in Nassim Taleb’s The Black Svian illustrates this automatic 
search for causality. He reports that bond prices initially rose on the day of 
Saddam Hussein’s capture in his hiding place in Iraq. Investors were 
apparently seeking safer assets that morning, and the Bloomberg News 
service flashed this headline: u.s. treasuries rise; hussein capture iwvnot 
curb terrorism. Half an hour later, bond prices fell back and the revised 
headline read: u.s. treasuries fall; hussein capture boosts allure of 
risky ASSETS. Obviously, Hussein’s capture was the major event of the day, 
and because of the way the automatic search for causes shapes our 
thinking, that event was destined to be the explanation of whatever 
happened in the market on that day. The two headlines look superficially 



like explanations of what happened in the market, but a statement that can 
explain two contradictory outcomes explains nothing at all. In fact, all the 
headlines do is satisfy our need for coherence: a large event is supposed 
to have consequences, and consequences need causes to explain them. 
We have limited information about what happened on a day, and System 1 
is adept at finding a coherent causal story that links the fragments of 
knowledge at its disposal. 

Read this sentence: 

After spending a day exploring beautiful sights in the crowded 

streets of New York, Jane discovered that her wallet was missing. 

When people who had read this brief story (along with many others) were 
given a surprise recall test, the word pickpocket was more strongly 
associated with the story than the word sights, even though the latter was 
actually in the sentence while the former was not. The rules of associative 
coherence tell us what happened. The event of a lost wallet could evoke 
many different causes: the wallet slipped out of a pocket, was left in the 
restaurant, etc. However, when the ideas of lost wallet, New York, and 
crowds are juxtaposed, they jointly evoke the explanation that a pickpocket 
caused the loss. In the story of the startling soup, the outcome—whether 
another customer wincing at the taste of the soup or the first person’s 
extreme reaction to the waiter’s touch—brings about an associatively 
coherent interpretation of the initial surprise, completing a plausible story. 

The aristocratic Belgian psychologist Albert Michotte published a book 
in 1945 (translated into English in 1963) that overturned centuries of 
thinking about causality, going back at least to Hume’s examination of the 
association of ideas. The commonly accepted wisdom was that we infer 
physical causality from repeated observations of correlations among 
events. We have had myriad experiences in which we saw one object in 
motion touching another object, which immediately starts to move, often 
(but not always) in the same direction. This is what happens when a billiard 
ball hits another, and it is also what happens when you knock over a vase 
by brushing against it. Michotte had a different idea: he argued that we see 
causality, just as directly as we see color. To make his point, he created 
episodes in n ttiowhich a black square drawn on paper is seen in motion; it 
comes into contact with another square, which immediately begins to 
move. The observers know that there is no real physical contact, but they 
nevertheless have a powerful “illusion of causality.” If the second object 
starts moving instantly, they describe it as having been “launched” by the 
first. Experiments have shown that six-month-old infants see the sequence 
of events as a cause-effect scenario, and they indicate surprise when the 



sequence is altered. We are evidently ready from birth to have 
impressions of causality, which do not depend on reasoning about 
patterns of causation. They are products of System 1. 

In 1944, at about the same time as Michotte published his 
demonstrations of physical causality, the psychologists Fritz Heider and 
Mary-Ann Simmel used a method similar to Michotte’s to demonstrate the 
perception of intentional causality. They made a film, which lasts all of one 
minute and forty seconds, in which you see a large triangle, a small 
triangle, and a circle moving around a shape that looks like a schematic 
view of a house with an open door. Viewers see an aggressive large 
triangle bullying a smaller triangle, a terrified circle, the circle and the small 
triangle joining forces to defeat the bully; they also observe much 
interaction around a door and then an explosive finale. The perception of 
intention and emotion is irresistible; only people afflicted by autism do not 
experience it. All this is entirely in your mind, of course. Your mind is ready 
and even eager to identify agents, assign them personality traits and 
specific intentions, and view their actions as expressing individual 
propensities. Here again, the evidence is that we are born prepared to 
make intentional attributions: infants under one year old identify bullies and 
victims, and expect a pursuer to follow the most direct path in attempting to 
catch whatever it is chasing. 

The experience of freely willed action is quite separate from physical 
causality. Although it is your hand that picks up the salt, you do not think of 
the event in terms of a chain of physical causation. You experience it as 
caused by a decision that a disembodied you made, because you wanted 
to add salt to your food. Many people find it natural to describe their soul 
as the source and the cause of their actions. The psychologist Paul Bloom, 
writing in The Atlantic in 2005, presented the provocative claim that our 
inborn readiness to separate physical and intentional causality explains the 
near universality of religious beliefs. He observes that “we perceive the 
world of objects as essentially separate from the world of minds, making it 
possible for us to envision soulless bodies and bodiless souls.” The two 
modes of causation that we are set to perceive make it natural for us to 
accept the two central beliefs of many religions: an immaterial divinity is 
the ultimate cause of the physical world, and immortal souls temporarily 
control our bodies while we live and leave them behind as we die. In 
Bloom’s view, the two concepts of causality were shaped separately by 
evolutionary forces, building the origins of religion into the structure of 
System 1. 

The prominence of causal intuitions is a recurrent theme in this book 
because people are prone to apply causal thinking inappropriately, to 



situations that require statistical reasoning. Statistical thinking derives 
conclusions about individual cases from properties of categories and 
ensembles. Unfortunately, System 1 does not have the capability for this 
mode of reasoning; System 2 can learn to think statistically but few people 
receive the necessary training. 

The psychology of causality was the basis of my decision to describe 
psycl c to thinhological processes by metaphors of agency with little 
concern for consistency. I sometimes refer to System 1 as an agent with 
certain traits and preferences, and sometimes as an associative machine 
that represents reality by a complex pattern of links. The system and the 
machine are fictions; my reason for using them is that they fit the way we 
think about causes. Heider’s triangles and circles are not really agents—it 
is just very easy and natural to think of them that way. It is a matter of 
mental economy. I assume that you (like me) find it easier to think about 
the mind if we describe what happens in terms of traits and intentions (the 
two systems) and sometimes in terms of mechanical regularities (the 
associative machine). I do not intend to convince you that the systems are 
real, any more than Heider intended you to believe that the large triangle is 
really a bully. 


Speaking of Norms and Causes 


“When the second applicant also turned out to be an old friend of 
mine, I wasn’t quite as surprised. Very little repetition is needed 
for a new experience to feel normal!” 


“When we survey the reaction to these products, let’s make sure 
we don’t focus exclusively on the average. We should consider 
the entire range of normal reactions.” 


“She can’t accept that she was just unlucky; she needs a causal 
story. She will end up thinking that someone intentionally 
sabotaged her work.” 



A Machine for Jumping to Conclusions 


The great comedian Danny Kaye had a line that has stayed with me since 
my adolescence. Speaking of a woman he dislikes, he says, “Her favorite 
position is beside herself, and her favorite sport is jumping to conclusions.” 
The line came up, I remember, in the initial conversation with Amos 
Tversky about the rationality of statistical intuitions, and now I believe it 
offers an apt description of how System 1 functions. Jumping to 
conclusions is efficient if the conclusions are likely to be correct and the 
costs of an occasional mistake acceptable, and if the jump saves much 
time and effort. Jumping to conclusions is risky when the situation is 
unfamiliar, the stakes are high, and there is no time to collect more 
information. These are the circumstances in which intuitive errors are 
probable, which may be prevented by a deliberate intervention of System 
2 . 


Neglect of Ambiguity and Suppression of Doubt 



ANN 


AG C 

APPROACHED 
THE BANK. 

1213 A 


Figure 6 

What do the three exhibits in figure 6 have in common? The answer is that 
all are ambiguous. \bu almost certainly read the display on the left as A B 
C and the one on the right as 12 13 14, but the middle items in both 
displays are identical. \bu could just as well have read e iom prthe eve 
them as A 13 C or 12 B 14, but you did not. Why not? The same shape is 
read as a letter in a context of letters and as a number in a context of 
numbers. The entire context helps determine the interpretation of each 
element. The shape is ambiguous, but you jump to a conclusion about its 
identity and do not become aware of the ambiguity that was resolved. 

As for Ann, you probably imagined a woman with money on her mind, 
walking toward a building with tellers and secure vaults. But this plausible 
interpretation is not the only possible one; the sentence is ambiguous. If an 
earlier sentence had been “They were floating gently down the river,” you 
would have imagined an altogether different scene. When you have just 
been thinking of a river, the word bank is not associated with money. In the 







absence of an explicit context, System 1 generated a likely context on its 
own. We know that it is System 1 because you were not aware of the 
choice or of the possibility of another interpretation. Unless you have been 
canoeing recently, you probably spend more time going to banks than 
floating on rivers, and you resolved the ambiguity accordingly. When 
uncertain, System 1 bets on an answer, and the bets are guided by 
experience. The rules of the betting are intelligent: recent events and the 
current context have the most weight in determining an interpretation. 
When no recent event comes to mind, more distant memories govern. 
Among your earliest and most memorable experiences was singing your 
ABCs; you did not sing your A13Cs. 

The most important aspect of both examples is that a definite choice 
was made, but you did not know it. Only one interpretation came to mind, 
and you were never aware of the ambiguity. System 1 does not keep track 
of alternatives that it rejects, or even of the fact that there were alternatives. 
Conscious doubt is not in the repertoire of System 1; it requires 
maintaining incompatible interpretations in mind at the same time, which 
demands mental effort. Uncertainty and doubt are the domain of System 2. 

A Bias to Believe and Confirm 

The psychologist Daniel Gilbert, widely known as the author of Stumbling 
to Happiness, once wrote an essay, titled “How Mental Systems Believe,” 
in which he developed a theory of believing and unbelieving that he traced 
to the seventeenth-century philosopher Baruch Spinoza. Gilbert proposed 
that understanding a statement must begin with an attempt to believe it: 
you must first know what the idea would mean if it were true. Only then can 
you decide whether or not to unbelieve it. The initial attempt to believe is 
an automatic operation of System 1, which involves the construction of the 
best possible interpretation of the situation. Even a nonsensical statement, 
Gilbert argues, will evoke initial belief. Try his example: “whitefish eat 
candy.” Nbu probably were aware of vague impressions of fish and candy 
as an automatic process of associative memory searched for links 
between the two ideas that would make sense of the nonsense. 

Gilbert sees unbelieving as an operation of System 2, and he reported 
an elegant experiment to make his point. The participants saw nonsensical 
assertions, such as “a dinca is a flame,” followed after a few seconds by a 
single word, “true” or “false.” They were later tested for their memory of 
which sentences had been labeled “true.” In one condition of the 
experiment subjects were required to hold digits in memory during the 
task. The disruption of System 2 had a selective effect: it made it difficult 



for people to “unbelieve” false sentences. In a later test of memory, the 
depleted par muumbling toticipants ended up thinking that many of the 
false sentences were true. The moral is significant: when System 2 is 
otherwise engaged, we will believe almost anything. System 1 is gullible 
and biased to believe, System 2 is in charge of doubting and unbelieving, 
but System 2 is sometimes busy, and often lazy. Indeed, there is evidence 
that people are more likely to be influenced by empty persuasive 
messages, such as commercials, when they are tired and depleted. 

The operations of associative memory contribute to a general 
confirmation bias. When asked, “Is Sam friendly?” different instances of 
Sam’s behavior will come to mind than would if you had been asked “Is 
Sam unfriendly?” A deliberate search for confirming evidence, known as 
positive test strategy, is also how System 2 tests a hypothesis. Contrary to 
the rules of philosophers of science, who advise testing hypotheses by 
trying to refute them, people (and scientists, quite often) seek data that are 
likely to be compatible with the beliefs they currently hold. The confirmatory 
bias of System 1 favors uncritical acceptance of suggestions and 
exaggeration of the likelihood of extreme and improbable events. If you are 
asked about the probability of a tsunami hitting California within the next 
thirty years, the images that come to your mind are likely to be images of 
tsunamis, in the manner Gilbert proposed for nonsense statements such 
as “whitefish eat candy.” You will be prone to overestimate the probability 
of a disaster. 

Exaggerated Emotional Coherence (Halo Effect) 

If you like the president’s politics, you probably like his voice and his 
appearance as well. The tendency to like (or dislike) everything about a 
person—including things you have not observed—is known as the halo 
effect. The term has been in use in psychology for a century, but it has not 
come into wide use in everyday language. This is a pity, because the halo 
effect is a good name for a common bias that plays a large role in shaping 
our view of people and situations. It is one of the ways the representation 
of the world that System 1 generates is simpler and more coherent than 
the real thing. 

\bu meet a woman named Joan at a party and find her personable and 
easy to talk to. Now her name comes up as someone who could be asked 
to contribute to a charity. What do you know about Joan’s generosity? The 
correct answer is that you know virtually nothing, because there is little 
reason to believe that people who are agreeable in social situations are 
also generous contributors to charities. But you like Joan and you will 



retrieve the feeling of liking her when you think of her. You also like 
generosity and generous people. By association, you are now 
predisposed to believe that Joan is generous. And now that you believe 
she is generous, you probably like Joan even better than you did earlier, 
because you have added generosity to her pleasant attributes. 

Real evidence of generosity is missing in the story of Joan, and the gap 
is filled by a guess that fits one’s emotional response to her. In other 
situations, evidence accumulates gradually and the interpretation is 
shaped by the emotion attached to the first impression. In an enduring 
classic of psychology, Solomon Asch presented descriptions of two 
people and asked for comments on their personality. What do you think of 
Alan and Ben? 

Ala n: i nte Hi g ent—i nd ustri o us—i m p uls i ve—cri ti ca I—stub bo m— 

envious 

Ben: envious—The#82stubborn—critical—impulsive— 

i nd ustri ous—i ntellige nt 

If you are like most of us, you viewed Alan much more favorably than Ben. 
The initial traits in the list change the very meaning of the traits that appear 
later. The stubbornness of an intelligent person is seen as likely to be 
justified and may actually evoke respect, but intelligence in an envious and 
stubborn person makes him more dangerous. The halo effect is also an 
example of suppressed ambiguity: like the word bank, the adjective 
stubborn is ambiguous and will be interpreted in a way that makes it 
coherent with the context. 

There have been many variations on this research theme. Participants in 
one study first considered the first three adjectives that describe Alan; then 
they considered the last three, which belonged, they were told, to another 
person. When they had imagined the two individuals, the participants were 
asked if it was plausible for all six adjectives to describe the same person, 
and most of them thought it was impossible! 

The sequence in which we observe characteristics of a person is often 
determined by chance. Sequence matters, however, because the halo 
effect increases the weight of first impressions, sometimes to the point that 
subsequent information is mostly wasted. Early in my career as a 
professor, I graded students’ essay exams in the conventional way. I would 
pick up one test booklet at a time and read all that student’s essays in 
immediate succession, grading them as I went. I would then compute the 
total and go on to the next student. I eventually noticed that my evaluations 
of the essays in each booklet were strikingly homogeneous. I began to 
suspect that my grading exhibited a halo effect, and that the first question I 



scored had a disproportionate effect on the overall grade. The mechanism 
was simple: if I had given a high score to the first essay, I gave the student 
the benefit of the doubt whenever I encountered a vague or ambiguous 
statement later on. This seemed reasonable. Surely a student who had 
done so well on the first essay would not make a foolish mistake in the 
second one! But there was a serious problem with my way of doing things. 
If a student had written two essays, one strong and one weak, I would end 
up with different final grades depending on which essay I read first. I had 
told the students that the two essays had equal weight, but that was not 
true: the first one had a much greater impact on the final grade than the 
second. This was unacceptable. 

I adopted a new procedure. Instead of reading the booklets in sequence, 

I read and scored all the students’ answers to the first question, then went 
on to the next one. I made sure to write all the scores on the inside back 
page of the booklet so that I would not be biased (even unconsciously) 
when I read the second essay. Soon after switching to the new method, I 
made a disconcerting observation: my confidence in my grading was now 
much lower than it had been. The reason was that I frequently experienced 
a discomfort that was new to me. When I was disappointed with a 
student’s second essay and went to the back page of the booklet to enter 
a poor grade, I occasionally discovered that I had given a top grade to the 
same student’s first essay. I also noticed that I was tempted to reduce the 
discrepancy by changing the grade that I had not yet written down, and 
found it hard to follow the simple rule of never yielding to that temptation. 
My grades for the essays of a single student often varied over a 
considerable range. The lack of coherence left me uncertain and 
frustrated. 

I was now less happy with and less confident in my grades than I had 
been earlier, but I recognized that thass confthis was a good sign, an 
indication that the new procedure was superior. The consistency I had 
enjoyed earlier was spurious; it produced a feeling of cognitive ease, and 
my System 2 was happy to lazily accept the final grade. By allowing myself 
to be strongly influenced by the first question in evaluating subsequent 
ones, I spared myself the dissonance of finding the same student doing 
very well on some questions and badly on others. The uncomfortable 
inconsistency that was revealed when I switched to the new procedure was 
real: it reflected both the inadequacy of any single question as a measure 
of what the student knew and the unreliability of my own grading. 

The procedure I adopted to tame the halo effect conforms to a general 
principle: decorrelate error! To understand how this principle works, 
imagine that a large number of observers are shown glass jars containing 
pennies and are challenged to estimate the number of pennies in each jar. 



As James Surowiecki explained in his best-selling The Wisdom of 
Crov\ds, this is the kind of task in which individuals do very poorly, but 
pools of individual judgments do remarkably well. Some individuals greatly 
overestimate the true number, others underestimate it, but when many 
judgments are averaged, the average tends to be quite accurate. The 
mechanism is straightforward: all individuals look at the same jar, and all 
their judgments have a common basis. On the other hand, the errors that 
individuals make are independent of the errors made by others, and (in the 
absence of a systematic bias) they tend to average to zero. However, the 
magic of error reduction works well only when the observations are 
independent and their errors uncorrelated. If the observers share a bias, 
the aggregation of judgments will not reduce it. Allowing the observers to 
influence each other effectively reduces the size of the sample, and with it 
the precision of the group estimate. 

To derive the most useful information from multiple sources of evidence, 
you should always try to make these sources independent of each other. 
This rule is part of good police procedure. When there are multiple 
witnesses to an event, they are not allowed to discuss it before giving their 
testimony. The goal is not only to prevent collusion by hostile witnesses, it 
is also to prevent unbiased witnesses from influencing each other. 
Witnesses who exchange their experiences will tend to make similar errors 
in their testimony, reducing the total value of the information they provide. 
Eliminating redundancy from your sources of information is always a good 
idea. 

The principle of independent judgments (and decorrelated errors) has 
immediate applications for the conduct of meetings, an activity in which 
executives in organizations spend a great deal of their working days. A 
simple rule can help: before an issue is discussed, all members of the 
committee should be asked to write a very brief summary of their position. 
This procedure makes good use of the value of the diversity of knowledge 
and opinion in the group. The standard practice of open discussion gives 
too much weight to the opinions of those who speak early and assertively, 
causing others to line up behind them. 

What You See is All There is (Wysiati) 

One of my favorite memories of the early years of working with Amos is a 
comedy routine he enjoyed performing. In a perfect impersonation of one 
of the professors with whom he had studied philosophy as an 
undergraduate, Amos would growl in Hebrew marked by a thick German 
accent: “\bu must never forget the Primat of the Is." What exactly his 


teacher had meant by that phrase never became clear to me (or to Amos, I 
believe), but Amos’s jokes always maht=cipde a point. He was reminded 
of the old phrase (and eventually I was too) whenever we encountered the 
remarkable asymmetry between the ways our mind treats information that 
is currently available and information we do not have. 

An essential design feature of the associative machine is that it 
represents only activated ideas. Information that is not retrieved (even 
unconsciously) from memory might as well not exist. System 1 excels at 
constructing the best possible story that incorporates ideas currently 
activated, but it does not (cannot) allow for information it does not have. 

The measure of success for System 1 is the coherence of the story it 
manages to create. The amount and quality of the data on which the story 
is based are largely irrelevant. When information is scarce, which is a 
common occurrence, System 1 operates as a machine for jumping to 
conclusions. Consider the following: “Will Mindik be a good leader? She is 
intelligent and strong...” An answer quickly came to your mind, and it was 
yes. You picked the best answer based on the very limited information 
available, but you jumped the gun. What if the next two adjectives were 
corrupt and cruel ? 

Take note of what you did not do as you briefly thought of Mindik as a 
leader. You did not start by asking, “What would I need to know before I 
formed an opinion about the quality of someone’s leadership?” System 1 
got to work on its own from the first adjective: intelligent is good, intelligent 
and strong is very good. This is the best story that can be constructed from 
two adjectives, and System 1 delivered it with great cognitive ease. The 
story will be revised if new information comes in (such as Mindik is 
corrupt), but there is no waiting and no subjective discomfort. And there 
also remains a bias favoring the first impression. 

The combination of a coherence-seeking System 1 with a lazy System 2 
implies that System 2 will endorse many intuitive beliefs, which closely 
reflect the impressions generated by System 1. Of course, System 2 also 
is capable of a more systematic and careful approach to evidence, and of 
following a list of boxes that must be checked before making a decision— 
think of buying a home, when you deliberately seek information that you 
don’t have. However, System 1 is expected to influence even the more 
careful decisions. Its input never ceases. 

Jumping to conclusions on the basis of limited evidence is so important 
to an understanding of intuitive thinking, and comes up so often in this 
book, that I will use a cumbersome abbreviation for it: WYSIATI, which 
stands for what you see is all there is. System 1 is radically insensitive to 
both the quality and the quantity of the information that gives rise to 



impressions and intuitions. 

Amos, with two of his graduate students at Stanford, reported a study 
that bears directly on WYSIATI, by observing the reaction of people who 
are given one-sided evidence and know it. The participants were exposed 
to legal scenarios such as the following: 

On September 3, plaintiff David Thornton, a forty-three-year-old 
union field representative, was present in Thrifty Drug Store 
#168, performing a routine union visit. Within ten minutes of his 
arrival, a store manager confronted him and told him he could no 
longer speak with the union employees on the floor of the store. 
Instead, he would have to see them in a back room while they 
were on break. Such a request is allowed by the union contract 
with Thrifty Drug but had never before been enforced. When Mr. 
Thornton objected, he was told that he had the choice of conto 
room whilforming to these requirements, leaving the store, or 
being arrested. At this point, Mr. Thornton indicated to the 
manager that he had always been allowed to speak to 
employees on the floor for as much as ten minutes, as long as no 
business was disrupted, and that he would rather be arrested 
than change the procedure of his routine visit. The manager then 
called the police and had Mr. Thornton handcuffed in the store for 
trespassing. After he was booked and put into a holding cell for a 
brief time, all charges were dropped. Mr. Thornton is suing Thrifty 
Drug for false arrest. 

In addition to this background material, which all participants read, different 
groups were exposed to presentations by the lawyers for the two parties. 
Naturally, the lawyer for the union organizer described the arrest as an 
intimidation attempt, while the lawyer for the store argued that having the 
talk in the store was disruptive and that the manager was acting properly. 
Some participants, like a jury, heard both sides. The lawyers added no 
useful information that you could not infer from the background story. 

The participants were fully aware of the setup, and those who heard only 
one side could easily have generated the argument for the other side. 
Nevertheless, the presentation of one-sided evidence had a very 
pronounced effect on judgments. Furthermore, participants who saw one¬ 
sided evidence were more confident of their judgments than those who 
saw both sides. This is just what you would expect if the confidence that 
people experience is determined by the coherence of the story they 
manage to construct from available information. It is the consistency of the 
information that matters for a good story, not its completeness. Indeed, you 



will often find that knowing little makes it easier to fit everything you know 
into a coherent pattern. 

WY SIATI facilitates the achievement of coherence and of the cognitive 
ease that causes us to accept a statement as true. It explains why we can 
think fast, and how we are able to make sense of partial information in a 
complex world. Much of the time, the coherent story we put together is 
close enough to reality to support reasonable action. However, I will also 
invoke WY SIATI to help explain a long and diverse list of biases of 
judgment and choice, including the following among many others: 


• Overconfidence: As the WY SIATI rule implies, neither the quantity 
nor the quality of the evidence counts for much in subjective 
confidence. The confidence that individuals have in their beliefs 
depends mostly on the quality of the story they can tell about what 
they see, even if they see little. We often fail to allow for the 
possibility that evidence that should be critical to our judgment is 
missing—what we see is all there is. Furthermore, our associative 
system tends to settle on a coherent pattern of activation and 
suppresses doubt and ambiguity. 

• Framing effects: Different ways of presenting the same information 
often evoke different emotions. The statement that “the odds of 
survival one month after surgery are 90%” is more reassuring than 
the equivalent statement that “mortality within one month of surgery is 
10%.” Similarly, cold cuts described as “90% fat-free” are more 
attractive than when they are described as “10% fat.” The 
equivalence of the alternative formulations is transparent, but an 
individual normally sees only one formulation, and what she sees is 
all there is. 

• Base-rate neglect: Recall Steve, the meek and tidy soul who is often 
believed to be a librarian. Th
e personality description is salient and 
vivid, and although you surely know that there are more male farm mu 

• Base-rers than male librarians, that statistical fact almost certainly 
did not come to your mind when you first considered the question. 
What you saw was all there was. 


Speaking of Jumping to Conclusions 



“She knows nothing about this person’s management skills. All 
she is going by is the halo effect from a good presentation.” 


“Let’s decorrelate errors by obtaining separate judgments on the 
issue before any discussion. We will get more information from 
independent assessments.” 


“They made that big decision on the basis of a good report from 
one consultant. WYSIATI—what you see is all there is. They did 
not seem to realize how little information they had.” 


“They didn’t want more information that might spoil their story. 
WYSIATI.” 



How Judgments Happen 


There is no limit to the number of questions you can answer, whether they 
are questions someone else asks or questions you ask yourself. Nor is 
there a limit to the number of attributes you can evaluate. You are capable 
of counting the number of capital letters on this page, comparing the height 
of the windows of your house to the one across the street, and assessing 
the political prospects of your senator on a scale from excellent to 
disastrous. The questions are addressed to System 2, which will direct 
attention and search memory to find the answers. System 2 receives 
questions or generates them: in either case it directs attention and 
searches memory to find the answers. System 1 operates differently. It 
continuously monitors what is going on outside and inside the mind, and 
continuously generates assessments of various aspects of the situation 
without specific intention and with little or no effort. These basic 
assessments play an important role in intuitive judgment, because they are 
easily substituted for more difficult questions—this is the essential idea of 
the heuristics and biases approach. Two other features of System 1 also 
support the substitution of one judgment for another. One is the ability to 
translate values across dimensions, which you do in answering a question 
that most people find easy: “If Sam were as tall as he is intelligent, how tall 
would he be?” Finally, there is the mental shotgun. An intention of System 2 
to answer a specific question or evaluate a particular attribute of the 
situation automatically triggers other computations, including basic 
assessments. 


Basic Assessments 

System 1 has been shaped by evolution to provide a continuous 
assessment of the main problems that an organism must solve to survive: 
How are things going? Is there a threat or a major opportunity? Is 
everything normal? Should I approach or avoid? The questions are 
perhaps less urgent for a human in a city environment than for a gazelle on 
the savannah, aalenc and e: How , but we have inherited the neural 
mechanisms that evolved to provide ongoing assessments of threat level, 
and they have not been turned off. Situations are constantly evaluated as 
good or bad, requiring escape or permitting approach. Good mood and 
cognitive ease are the human equivalents of assessments of safety and 
familiarity. 

For a specific example of a basic assessment, consider the ability to 
discriminate friend from foe at a glance. This contributes to one’s chances 



of survival in a dangerous world, and such a specialized capability has 
indeed evolved. Alex Todorov, my colleague at Princeton, has explored the 
biological roots of the rapid judgments of how safe it is to interact with a 
stranger. He showed that we are endowed with an ability to evaluate, in a 
single glance at a stranger’s face, two potentially crucial facts about that 
person: how dominant (and therefore potentially threatening) he is, and 
how trustworthy he is, whether his intentions are more likely to be friendly or 
hostile. The shape of the face provides the cues for assessing dominance: 
a “strong” square chin is one such cue. Facial expression (smile or frown) 
provides the cues for assessing the stranger’s intentions. The combination 
of a square chin with a turned-down mouth may spell trouble. The accuracy 
of face reading is far from perfect: round chins are not a reliable indicator 
of meekness, and smiles can (to some extent) be faked. Still, even an 
imperfect ability to assess strangers confers a survival advantage. 

This ancient mechanism is put to a novel use in the modern world: it has 
some influence on how people vote. Todorov showed his students pictures 
of men’s faces, sometimes for as little as one-tenth of a second, and 
asked them to rate the faces on various attributes, including likability and 
competence. Observers agreed quite well on those ratings. The faces that 
Todorov showed were not a random set: they were the campaign portraits 
of politicians competing for elective office. Todorov then compared the 
results of the electoral races to the ratings of competence that Princeton 
students had made, based on brief exposure to photographs and without 
any political context. In about 70% of the races for senator, congressman, 
and governor, the election winner was the candidate whose face had 
earned a higher rating of competence. This striking result was quickly 
confirmed in national elections in Finland, in zoning board elections in 
England, and in various electoral contests in Australia, Germany, and 
Mexico. Surprisingly (at least to me), ratings of competence were far more 
predictive of voting outcomes in TodoroV s study than ratings of likability. 

Todorov has found that people judge competence by combining the two 
dimensions of strength and trustworthiness. The faces that exude 
competence combine a strong chin with a slight confident-appearing 
smile. There is no evidence that these facial features actually predict how 
well politicians will perform in office. But studies of the brain’s response to 
winning and losing candidates show that we are biologically predisposed 
to reject candidates who lack the attributes we value—in this research, 
losers evoked stronger indications of (negative) emotional response. This 
is an example of what I will call a judgment heuristic in the following 
chapters. Voters are attempting to form an impression of how good a 
candidate will be in office, and they fall back on a simpler assessment that 
is made quickly and automatically and is available when System 2 must 



make its decision. 

Political scientists followed up on Todorov’s initial research by 
identifying a category of voters for whom the automatic preferences of 
System 1 are particularly likely to play a large role. They found what they 
were looking for among politicalr m="5%"&gt;Todoly uninformed voters who 
watch a great deal of television. As expected, the effect of facial 
competence on voting is about three times larger for information-poor and 
TV-prone voters than for others who are better informed and watch less 
television. Evidently, the relative importance of System 1 in determining 
voting choices is not the same for all people. We will encounter other 
examples of such individual differences. 

System 1 understands language, of course, and understanding depends 
on the basic assessments that are routinely carried out as part of the 
perception of events and the comprehension of messages. These 
assessments include computations of similarity and representativeness, 
attributions of causality, and evaluations of the availability of associations 
and exemplars. They are performed even in the absence of a specific task 
set, although the results are used to meet task demands as they arise. 

The list of basic assessments is long, but not every possible attribute is 
assessed. For an example, look briefly at figure 7 . 

A glance provides an immediate impression of many features of the 
display. You know that the two towers are equally tall and that they are 
more similar to each other than the tower on the left is to the array of blocks 
in the middle. However, you do not immediately know that the number of 
blocks in the left-hand tower is the same as the number of blocks arrayed 
on the floor, and you have no impression of the height of the tower that you 
could build from them. To confirm that the numbers are the same, you 
would need to count the two sets of blocks and compare the results, an 
activity that only System 2 can carry out. 



















Figure 7 


Sets and Prototypes 


For another example, consider the question: What is the average length of 
the lines in figure 8? 



Figure 8 


This question is easy and System 1 answers it without prompting. 
Experiments have shown that a fraction of a second is sufficient for people 
to register the average length of an array of lines with considerable 
precision. Furthermore, the accuracy of these judgments is not impaired 
when the observer is cognitively busy with a memory task. They do not 
necessarily know how to describe the average in inches or centimeters, 
but they will be very accurate in adjusting the length of another line to match 
the average. System 2 is not needed to form an impression of the norm of 
length for an array. System 1 does it, automatically and effortlessly, just as 
it registers the color of the lines and the fact that they are not parallel. We 
also can form an immediate impression of the number of objects in an 
array—precisely if there are four or fewer objects, crudely if there are 
more. 

Now to another question: What is the total length of the lines in figure 8? 
This is a different experience, because System 1 has no suggestions to 
offer. The only way you can answer this question is by activating System 2, 
which will laboriously estimate the average, estimate or count the lines, 
and multiply average length by the number of lines. 
estimaight="0%"&gt; 

The failure of System 1 to compute the total length of a set of lines at a 
glance may look obvious to you; you never thought you could do it. It is in 
fact an instance of an important limitation of that system. Because System 
1 represents categories by a prototype or a set of typical exemplars, it 



deals well with averages but poorly with sums. The size of the category, the 
number of instances it contains, tends to be ignored in judgments of what I 
will call sum-like variables. 

Participants in one of the numerous experiments that were prompted by 
the litigation following the disastrous Exxon Valdez oil spill were asked 
their willingness to pay for nets to cover oil ponds in which migratory birds 
often drown. Different groups of participants stated their willingness to pay 
to save 2,000, 20,000, or 200,000 birds. If saving birds is an economic 
good it should be a sum-like variable: saving 200,000 birds should be 
worth much more than saving 2,000 birds. In fact, the average contributions 
of the three groups were $80, $78, and $88 respectively. The number of 
birds made very little difference. What the participants reacted to, in all 
three groups, was a prototype—the awful image of a helpless bird 
drowning, its feathers soaked in thick oil. The almost complete neglect of 
quantity in such emotional contexts has been confirmed many times. 

Intensity Matching 

Questions about your happiness, the president’s popularity, the proper 
punishment of financial evildoers, and the future prospects of a politician 
share an important characteristic: they all refer to an underlying dimension 
of intensity or amount, which permits the use of the word more: more 
happy, more popular, more severe, or more powerful (for a politician). For 
example, a candidate’s political future can range from the low of “She will 
be defeated in the primary” to a high of “She will someday be president of 
the United States.” 

Here we encounter a new aptitude of System 1. An underlying scale of 
intensity allows matching across diverse dimensions. If crimes were 
colors, murder would be a deeper shade of red than theft. If crimes were 
expressed as music, mass murder would be played fortissimo while 
accumulating unpaid parking tickets would be a faint pianissimo. And of 
course you have similar feelings about the intensity of punishments. In 
classic experiments, people adjusted the loudness of a sound to the 
severity of crimes; other people adjusted loudness to the severity of legal 
punishments. If you heard two notes, one for the crime and one for the 
punishment, you would feel a sense of injustice if one tone was much 
louder than the other. 

Consider an example that we will encounter again later: 


Julie read fluently when she was four years old. 



Now match Julie’s reading prowess as a child to the following intensity 
scales: 


How tall is a man who is as tall as Julie was precocious? 

What do you think of 6 feet? Obviously too little. What about 7 feet? 
Probably too much. You are looking for a height that is as remarkable as 
the achievement of reading at age four. Fairly remarkable, but not 
extraordinary. Reading at fifteen months would be extraordinary, perhaps 
like a man who is 7'8". 

What level of income in your profession matches Julie’s reading 
achievement? 

Which crime is as severe as Julie was precocious? 

Which graduating GPA in an Ivy League college matches Julie’s 
reading? 

Not very hard, was it? Furthermore, you can be assured that your matches 
will be quite close to those of other people in your cultural milieu. We will 
see that when people are asked to predict Julie’s GPA from the 
information about the age at which she learned to read, they answer by 
translating from one scale to another and pick the matching GPA. And we 
will also see why this mode of prediction by matching is statistically wrong 
—although it is perfectly natural to System 1, and for most people except 
statisticians it is also acceptable to System 2. 

The Mental Shotgun 

System 1 carries out many computations at any one time. Some of these 
are routine assessments that go on continuously. Whenever your eyes are 
open, your brain computes a three-dimensional representation of what is in 
your field of vision, complete with the shape of objects, their position in 
space, and their identity. No intention is needed to trigger this operation or 
the continuous monitoring for violated expectations. In contrast to these 
routine assessments, other computations are undertaken only when 
needed: you do not maintain a continuous evaluation of how happy or 
wealthy you are, and even if you are a political addict you do not 
continuously assess the president’s prospects. The occasional judgments 
are voluntary. They occur only when you intend them to do so. 

Y)u do not automatically count the number of syllables of every word you 
read, but you can do it if you so choose. However, the control over 
intended computations is far from precise: we often compute much more 
than we want or need. I call this excess computation the mental shotqun. It 



is impossible to aim at a single point with a shotgun because it shoots 
pellets that scatter, and it seems almost equally difficult for System 1 not to 
do more than System 2 charges it to do. Two experiments that I read long 
ago suggested this image. 

Participants in one experiment listened to pairs of words, with the 
instruction to press a key as quickly as possible whenever they detected 
that the words rhymed. The words rhyme in both these pairs: 

VOTE—NOTE 
VOTE—GOAT 

The difference is obvious to you because you see the two pairs. VOTE and 
GOAT rhyme, but they are spelled differently. The participants only heard 
the words, but they were also influenced by the spelling. They were 
distinctly slower to recognize the words as rhyming if their spelling was 
discrepant. Although the instructions required only a comparison of 
sounds, the participants also compared their spelling, and the mismatch 
on the irrelevant dimension slowed them down. An intention to answer one 
question evoked another, which was not only superfluous but actually 
detrimental to the main task. 

In another study, people listened to a series of sentences, with the 
instruction to press one key as quickly as post="lly desible to indicate if the 
sentence was literally true, and another key if the sentence was not literally 
true. What are the correct responses for the following sentences? 

Some roads are snakes. 

Some jobs are snakes. 

Some jobs are jails. 

All three sentences are literally false. However, you probably noticed that 
the second sentence is more obviously false than the other two—the 
reaction times collected in the experiment confirmed a substantial 
difference. The reason for the difference is that the two difficult sentences 
can be metaphorically true. Here again, the intention to perform one 
computation evoked another. And here again, the correct answer prevailed 
in the conflict, but the conflict with the irrelevant answer disrupted 
performance. In the next chapter we will see that the combination of a 
mental shotgun with intensity matching explains why we have intuitive 
judgments about many things that we know little about. 


Speaking of Judgment 



“Evaluating people as attractive or not is a basic assessment. 
You do that automatically whether or not you want to, and it 
influences you.” 


“There are circuits in the brain that evaluate dominance from the 
shape of the face. He looks the part for a leadership role.” 


“The punishment won’t feel just unless its intensity matches the 
crime. Just like you can match the loudness of a sound to the 
brightness of a light.” 


“This was a clear instance of a mental shotgun. He was asked 
whether he thought the company was financially sound, but he 
couldn’t forget that he likes their product.” 



Answering an Easier Question 


A remarkable aspect of your mental life is that you are rarely stumped. 
True, you occasionally face a question such as 17 * 24 = ? to which no 
answer comes immediately to mind, but these dumbfounded moments are 
rare. The normal state of your mind is that you have intuitive feelings and 
opinions about almost everything that comes your way. You like or dislike 
people long before you know much about them; you trust or distrust 
strangers without knowing why; you feel that an enterprise is bound to 
succeed without analyzing it. Whether you state them or not, you often have 
answers to questions that you do not completely understand, relying on 
evidence that you can neither explain nor defend. 

Substituting Questions 

I propose a simple account of how we generate intuitive opinions on 
complex matters. If a satisfactory answer to a hard question isebr ques D 
not found quickly, System 1 will find a related question that is easier and 
will answer it. I call the operation of answering one question in place of 
another substitution. I also adopt the following terms: 


The target question is the assessment you intend to produce. 

The heuristic question is the simpler question that you answer instead. 


The technical definition of heuristic is a simple procedure that helps find 
adequate, though often imperfect, answers to difficult questions. The word 
comes from the same root as eureka. 

The idea of substitution came up early in my work with Amos, and it was 
the core of what became the heuristics and biases approach. We asked 
ourselves how people manage to make judgments of probability without 
knowing precisely what probability is. We concluded that people must 
somehow simplify that impossible task, and we set out to find how they do 
it. Our answer was that when called upon to judge probability, people 
actually judge something else and believe they have judged probability. 
System 1 often makes this move when faced with difficult target questions, 
if the answer to a related and easier heuristic question comes readily to 
mind. 

Substituting one question for another can be a good strategy for solving 
difficult problems, and George Polya included substitution in his classic 



Howto Solve It “tf you can’t solve a problem, then there is an easier 
problem you can solve: find it.” Polya’s heuristics are strategic procedures 
that are deliberately implemented by System 2. But the heuristics that I 
discuss in this chapter are not chosen; they are a consequence of the 
mental shotgun, the imprecise control we have over targeting our 
responses to questions. 

Consider the questions listed in the left-hand column of table 1. These 
are difficult questions, and before you can produce a reasoned answer to 
any of them you must deal with other difficult issues. What is the meaning 
of happiness? What are the likely political developments in the next six 
months? What are the standard sentences for other financial crimes? How 
strong is the competition that the candidate faces? What other 
environmental or other causes should be considered? Dealing with these 
questions seriously is completely impractical. But you are not limited to 
perfectly reasoned answers to questions. There is a heuristic alternative to 
careful reasoning, which sometimes works fairly well and sometimes leads 
to serious errors. 


Target Question Heuristic Question 

How much would you contribute to How much emotion do I feel when 
save an endangered species? I think of dying dolphins? 

How happy are you with your life .... ,. , . ,, 0 

, ? 3 3 What is my mood right now? 


How popular is the president right How popular will the president be 
now? six months from now? 

How should financial advisers who How much anger do I feel when I 
prey on the elderly be punished? think of financial predators? 

This woman is running for the primary. Does this woman look like a 
How far will she go in politics? political winner? 

Table 1 


The mental shotgun makes it easy to generate quick answers to difficult 
questions without imposing much hard work on your lazy System 2. The 



right-hand counterpart of each of the left-hand questions is very likely to be 
evoked and very easily answered, 'four feelings about dolphins and 
financial crooks, your current mood, your impressions of the political skill of 
the primary candidate, or the current standing of the president will readily 
come to mind. The heuristic questions provide an off-the-shelf answer to 
each of the difficult target questions. 

Something is still missing from this story: the answers need to be fitted 
to the original questions. For example, my feelings about dying dolphins 
must be expressed in dollars. Another capability of System 1, intensity 
matching, is available to solve that problem. Recall that both feelings and 
contribution dollars are intensity scales. I can feel more or less strongly 
about dolphins and there is a contribution that matches the intensity of my 
feelings. The dollar amount that will come to my mind is the matching 
amount. Similar intensity matches are possible for all the questions. For 
example, the political skills of a candidate can range from pathetic to 
extraordinarily impressive, and the scale of political success can range 
from the low of “She will be defeated in the primary” to a high of “She will 
someday be president of the United States.” 

The automatic processes of the mental shotgun and intensity matching 
often make available one or more answers to easy questions that could be 
mapped onto the target question. On some occasions, substitution will 
occur and a heuristic answer will be endorsed by System 2. Of course, 
System 2 has the opportunity to reject this intuitive answer, or to modify it 
by incorporating other information. However, a lazy System 2 often follows 
the path of least effort and endorses a heuristic answer without much 
scrutiny of whether it is truly appropriate. You will not be stumped, you will 
not have to work very her p wheard, and you may not even notice that you 
did not answer the question you were asked. Furthermore, you may not 
realize that the target question was difficult, because an intuitive answer to 
it came readily to mind. 


The 3-D Heuristic 

Have a look at the picture of the three men and answer the question that 
follows. 



Figure 9 


As printed on the page, is the figure on the right larger than the 
figure on the left? 

The obvious answer comes quickly to mind: the figure on the right is 
larger. If you take a ruler to the two figures, however, you will discover that 
in fact the figures are exactly the same size. Your impression of their 
relative size is dominated by a powerful illusion, which neatly illustrates the 
process of substitution. 

The corridor in which the figures are seen is drawn in perspective and 
appears to go into the depth plane. Y)ur perceptual system automatically 
interprets the picture as a three-dimensional scene, not as an image 
printed on a flat paper surface. In the 3-D interpretation, the person on the 
right is both much farther away and much larger than the person on the left. 
For most of us, this impression of 3-D size is overwhelming. Only visual 


artists and experienced photographers have developed the skill of seeing 
the drawing as an object on the page. For the rest of us, substitution 
occurs: the dominant impression of 3-D size dictates the judgment of 2-D 
size. The illusion is due to a 3-D heuristic. 

What happens here is a true illusion, not a misunderstanding of the 
question. You knew that the question was about the size of the figures in 
the picture, as printed on the page. If you had been asked to estimate the 
size of the figures, we know from experiments that your answer would have 
been in inches, not feet. \bu were not confused about the question, but you 
were influenced by the answer to a question that you were not asked: “How 
tall are the three people?” 

The essential step in the heuristic—the substitution of three-dimensional 
for two-dimensional size—occurred automatically. The picture contains 
cues that suggest a 3-D interpretation. These cues are irrelevant to the 
task at hand—the judgment of size of the figure on the page—and you 
should have ignored them, but you could not. The bias associated with the 
heuristic is that objects that appear to be more distant also appear to be 
larger on the page. As this example illustrates, a judgment that is based on 
substitution will inevitably be biased in predictable ways. In this case, it 
happens so deep in the perceptual system that you simply cannot help it. 

The Mood Heuristic for Happiness 

A survey of German students is one of the best examples of substitution. 
The survey that the young participants completed included the following 
two questions: 

How happy are you these days? 

How many dates did you have last month? 

&lt; stprto a p height="0%" width="0%"&gt;The experimenters were interested 
in the correlation between the two answers. Would the students who 
reported many dates say that they were happier than those with fewer 
dates? Surprisingly, no: the correlation between the answers was about 
zero. Evidently, dating was not what came first to the students’ minds when 
they were asked to assess their happiness. Another group of students saw 
the same two questions, but in reverse order: 

How many dates did you have last month? 

How happy are you these days? 

The results this time were completely different. In this sequence, the 



correlation between the number of dates and reported happiness was 
about as high as correlations between psychological measures can get. 
What happened? 

The explanation is straightforward, and it is a good example of 
substitution. Dating was apparently not the center of these students’ life (in 
the first survey, happiness and dating were uncorrelated), but when they 
were asked to think about their romantic life, they certainly had an 
emotional reaction. The students who had many dates were reminded of a 
happy aspect of their life, while those who had none were reminded of 
loneliness and rejection. The emotion aroused by the dating question was 
still on everyone’s mind when the query about general happiness came up. 

The psychology of what happened is precisely analogous to the 
psychology of the size illusion in figure 9. “Happiness these days” is not a 
natural or an easy assessment. A good answer requires a fair amount of 
thinking. However, the students who had just been asked about their dating 
did not need to think hard because they already had in their mind an 
answer to a related question: how happy they were with their love life. They 
substituted the question to which they had a readymade answer for the 
question they were asked. 

Here again, as we did for the illusion, we can ask: Are the students 
confused? Do they really think that the two questions—the one they were 
asked and the one they answer—are synonymous? Of course not. The 
students do not temporarily lose their ability to distinguish romantic life 
from life as a whole. If asked about the two concepts, they would say they 
are different. But they were not asked whether the concepts are different. 
They were asked how happy they were, and System 1 has a ready answer. 

Dating is not unique. The same pattern is found if a question about the 
students’ relations with their parents or about their finances immediately 
precedes the question about general happiness. In both cases, 
satisfaction in the particular domain dominates happiness reports. Any 
emotionally significant question that alters a person’s mood will have the 
same effect. WYSIATI. The present state of mind looms very large when 
people evaluate their happiness. 

The Affect Heuristic 

The dominance of conclusions over arguments is most pronounced where 
emotions are involved. The psychologist Paul Slovic has proposed an 
affect heuristic in which people let their likes and dislikes determine their 
beliefs about the world. Your political preference determines the 
arguments that you find compelling. If you like the current health policy, you 



believe its benefits are substantial and its costs more manageable than 
the costs of alternatives. If you are a hawk in your attitude toward other 
nations, you probablthep"0%y think they are relatively weak and likely to 
submit to your country’s will. If you are a dove, you probably think they are 
strong and will not be easily coerced. Your emotional attitude to such 
things as irradiated food, red meat, nuclear power, tattoos, or motorcycles 
drives your beliefs about their benefits and their risks. If you dislike any of 
these things, you probably believe that its risks are high and its benefits 
negligible. 

The primacy of conclusions does not mean that your mind is completely 
closed and that your opinions are wholly immune to information and 
sensible reasoning. Your beliefs, and even your emotional attitude, may 
change (at least a little) when you learn that the risk of an activity you 
disliked is smaller than you thought. However, the information about lower 
risks will also change your view of the benefits (for the better) even if 
nothing was said about benefits in the information you received. 

We see here a new side of the “personality” of System 2. Until now I 
have mostly described it as a more or less acquiescent monitor, which 
allows considerable leeway to System 1. I have also presented System 2 
as active in deliberate memory search, complex computations, 
comparisons, planning, and choice. In the bat-and-ball problem and in 
many other examples of the interplay between the two systems, it 
appeared that System 2 is ultimately in charge, with the ability to resist the 
suggestions of System 1, slow things down, and impose logical analysis. 
Self-criticism is one of the functions of System 2. In the context of attitudes, 
however, System 2 is more of an apologist for the emotions of System 1 
than a critic of those emotions—an endorser rather than an enforcer. Its 
search for information and arguments is mostly constrained to information 
that is consistent with existing beliefs, not with an intention to examine 
them. An active, coherence-seeking System 1 suggests solutions to an 
undemanding System 2. 

Speaking of Substitution and Heuristics 


“Do we still remember the question we are trying to answer? Or 
have we substituted an easier one?” 


“The question we face is whether this candidate can succeed. 
The question we seem to answer is whether she interviews well. 
Let’s not substitute.” 



“He likes the project, so he thinks its costs are low and its 
benefits are high. Nice example of the affect heuristic.” 


“We are using last year’s performance as a heuristic to predict 
the value of the firm several years from now. Is this heuristic good 
enough? What other information do we need?” 

The table below contains a list of features and activities that have been 
attributed to System 1. Each of the active sentences replaces a statement, 
technically more accurate but harder to understand, to the effect that a 
mental event occurs automatically and fast. My hope is that the list of traits 
will help you develop an intuitive sense of the “personality” of the fictitious 
System 1. As happens with other characters you know, you will have 
hunches about what System 1 would do under different circumstances, and 
most of your hunches will be correct. 


Characteristics of System 1 


• generates impressions, feelings, and inclinations; when endorsed by 
System 2 these become beliefs, attitudes, and intentions 

• operates automatically and quickly, with little or no effort, and no 
sense of voluntary control 

• can be programmed by System 2 to mobilize attention when a 
particular pattern is detected (search) 

• executes skilled responses and generates skilled intuitions, after 
adequate training 

• creates a coherent pattern of activated ideas in associative memory 

• links a sense of cognitive ease to illusions of truth, pleasant feelings, 
and reduced vigilance 

• distinguishes the surprising from the normal 

• infers and invents causes and intentions 

• neglects ambiguity and suppresses doubt 

• is biased to believe and confirm 

• exaggerates emotional consistency (halo effect) 

• focuses on existing evidence and ignores absent evidence 



(WYSIATI) 


generates a limited set of basic assessments 
represents sets by norms and prototypes, does not integrate 

matches intensities across scales (e.g., size to loudness) 
computes more than intended (mental shotgun) 
sometimes substitutes an easier question for a difficult one 
(heuristics) 

is more sensitive to changes than to states (prospect theory)” 
overweights low probabilities - 

shows diminishing sensitivity to quantity (psychophysics) 1 
responds more strongly to losses than to gains (loss aversion) 1 
frames decision problems narrowly, in isolation from one another 



Part 2 



Heuristics and Biases 



The Law of Small Numbers 


A study of the incidence of kidney cancer in the 3,141 counties of the 
United a&gt;&lt; HTbStates reveals a remarkable pattern. The counties in which 
the incidence of kidney cancer is lowest are mostly rural, sparsely 
populated, and located in traditionally Republican states in the Midwest, 
the South, and the West. What do you make of this? 

"four mind has been very active in the last few seconds, and it was 
mainly a System 2 operation. You deliberately searched memory and 
formulated hypotheses. Some effort was involved; your pupils dilated, and 
your heart rate increased measurably. But System 1 was not idle: the 
operation of System 2 depended on the facts and suggestions retrieved 
from associative memory. You probably rejected the idea that Republican 
politics provide protection against kidney cancer. Very likely, you ended up 
focusing on the fact that the counties with low incidence of cancer are 
mostly rural. The witty statisticians Howard Wainer and Harris Zwerling, 
from whom I learned this example, commented, “It is both easy and 
tempting to infer that their low cancer rates are directly due to the clean 
living of the rural lifestyle—no air pollution, no water pollution, access to 
fresh food without additives.” This makes perfect sense. 

Now consider the counties in which the incidence of kidney cancer is 
highest. These ailing counties tend to be mostly rural, sparsely populated, 
and located in traditionally Republican states in the Midwest, the South, 
and the West. Tongue-in-cheek, Wainer and Zwerling comment: “It is easy 
to infer that their high cancer rates might be directly due to the poverty of 
the rural lifestyle—no access to good medical care, a high-fat diet, and too 
much alcohol, too much tobacco.” Something is wrong, of course. The rural 
lifestyle cannot explain both very high and very low incidence of kidney 
cancer. 

The key factor is not that the counties were rural or predominantly 
Republican. It is that rural counties have small populations. And the main 
lesson to be learned is not about epidemiology, it is about the difficult 
relationship between our mind and statistics. System 1 is highly adept in 
one form of thinking—it automatically and effortlessly identifies causal 
connections between events, sometimes even when the connection is 
spurious. When told about the high-incidence counties, you immediately 
assumed that these counties are different from other counties for a reason, 
that there must be a cause that explains this difference. As we shall see, 
however, System 1 is inept when faced with “merely statistical” facts, which 
change the probability of outcomes but do not cause them to happen. 

A random event, by definition, does not lend itself to explanation, but 



collections of random events do behave in a highly regular fashion. 
Imagine a large urn filled with marbles. Half the marbles are red, half are 
white. Next, imagine a very patient person (or a robot) who blindly draws 4 
marbles from the urn, records the number of red balls in the sample, throws 
the balls back into the urn, and then does it all again, many times. If you 
summarize the results, you will find that the outcome “2 red, 2 white” occurs 
(almost exactly) 6 times as often as the outcome “4 red” or “4 white.” This 
relationship is a mathematical fact. You can predict the outcome of 
repeated sampling from an urn just as confidently as you can predict what 
will happen if you hit an egg with a hammer. You cannot predict every detail 
of how the shell will shatter, but you can be sure of the general idea. There 
is a difference: the satisfying sense of causation that you experience when 
thinking of a hammer hitting an egg is altogether absent when you think 
about sampling. 

A related statistical fact is relevant to the cancer example. From the 
same urn, two very patient marble counters thatpy dake turns. Jack draws 
4 marbles on each trial, Jill draws 7. They both record each time they 
observe a homogeneous sample—all white or all red. If they go on long 
enough, Jack will observe such extreme outcomes more often than Jill—by 
a factor of 8 (the expected percentages are 12.5% and 1.56%). Again, no 
hammer, no causation, but a mathematical fact: samples of 4 marbles 
yield extreme results more often than samples of 7 marbles do. 

Now imagine the population of the United States as marbles in a giant 
um. Some marbles are marked KC, for kidney cancer. You draw samples 
of marbles and populate each county in turn. Rural samples are smaller 
than other samples. Just as in the game of Jack and Jill, extreme 
outcomes (very high and/or very low cancer rates) are most likely to be 
found in sparsely populated counties. This is all there is to the story. 

We started from a fact that calls for a cause: the incidence of kidney 
cancer varies widely across counties and the differences are systematic. 
The explanation I offered is statistical: extreme outcomes (both high and 
low) are more likely to be found in small than in large samples. This 
explanation is not causal. The small population of a county neither causes 
nor prevents cancer; it merely allows the incidence of cancer to be much 
higher (or much lower) than it is in the larger population. The deeper truth is 
that there is nothing to explain. The incidence of cancer is not truly lower or 
higher than normal in a county with a small population, it just appears to be 
so in a particular year because of an accident of sampling. If we repeat the 
analysis next year, we will observe the same general pattern of extreme 
results in the small samples, but the counties where cancer was common 
last year will not necessarily have a high incidence this year. If this is the 
case, the differences between dense and rural counties do not really count 



as facts: they are what scientists call artifacts, observations that are 
produced entirely by some aspect of the method of research—in this case, 
by differences in sample size. 

The story I have told may have surprised you, but it was not a revelation. 
You have long known that the results of large samples deserve more trust 
than smaller samples, and even people who are innocent of statistical 
knowledge have heard about this law of large numbers. But “knowing” is 
not a yes-no affair and you may find that the following statements apply to 
you: 


• The feature “sparsely populated” did not immediately stand out as 
relevant when you read the epidemiological story. 

• You were at least mildly surprised by the size of the difference 
between samples of 4 and samples of 7. 

• Even now, you must exert some mental effort to see that the following 
two statements mean exactly the same thing: 

• Large samples are more precise than small samples. 

• Small samples yield extreme results more often than large 
samples do. 


The first statement has a clear ring of truth, but until the second version 
makes intuitive sense, you have not truly understood the first. 

The bottom line: yes, you did know that the results of large samples are 
more precise, but you may now realize that you did not know it very well. 
You are not alone. The first study that Amos and I did together showed that 
even sophisticated researchers have poor intuitions and a wobbly 
understanding of sampling effects. 

The Law of Small Numbers 

My collaboration with Amos in the early 1970s began with a discussion of 
the claim that people who have had no training in statistics are good 
“intuitive statisticians.” He told my seminar and me of researchers at the 
University of Michigan who were generally optimistic about intuitive 
statistics. I had strong feelings about that claim, which I took personally: I 
had recently discovered that I was not a good intuitive statistician, and I did 
not believe that I was worse than others. 

For a research psychologist, sampling variation is not a curiosity; it is a 
nuisance and a costly obstacle, which turns the undertaking of every 



research project into a gamble. Suppose that you wish to confirm the 
hypothesis that the vocabulary of the average six-year-old girl is larger than 
the vocabulary of an average boy of the same age. The hypothesis is true 
in the population; the average vocabulary of girls is indeed larger. Girls and 
boys vary a great deal, however, and by the luck of the draw you could 
select a sample in which the difference is inconclusive, or even one in 
which boys actually score higher. If you are the researcher, this outcome is 
costly to you because you have wasted time and effort, and failed to 
confirm a hypothesis that was in fact true. Using a sufficiently large sample 
is the only way to reduce the risk. Researchers who pick too small a 
sample leave themselves at the mercy of sampling luck. 

The risk of error can be estimated for any given sample size by a fairly 
simple procedure. Traditionally, however, psychologists do not use 
calculations to decide on a sample size. They use their judgment, which is 
commonly flawed. An article I had read shortly before the debate with 
Amos demonstrated the mistake that researchers made (they still do) by a 
dramatic observation. The author pointed out that psychologists commonly 
chose samples so small that they exposed themselves to a 50% risk of 
failing to confirm their true hypotheses! No researcher in his right mind 
would accept such a risk. A plausible explanation was that psychologists’ 
decisions about sample size reflected prevalent intuitive misconceptions 
of the extent of sampling variation. 

The article shocked me, because it explained some troubles I had had in 
my own research. Like most research psychologists, I had routinely chosen 
samples that were too small and had often obtained results that made no 
sense. Now I knew why: the odd results were actually artifacts of my 
research method. My mistake was particularly embarrassing because I 
taught statistics and knew how to compute the sample size that would 
reduce the risk of failure to an acceptable level. But I had never chosen a 
sample size by computation. Like my colleagues, I had trusted tradition 
and my intuition in planning my experiments and had never thought 
seriously about the issue. When Amos visited the seminar, I had already 
reached the conclusion that my intuitions were deficient, and in the course 
of the seminar we quickly agreed that the Michigan optimists were wrong. 

Amos and I set out to examine whether I was the only fool or a member 
of a majority of fools, by testing whether researchers selected for 
mathematical expertise would make similar mistakes. We developed a 
questionnaire that described realistic research situations, including 
replications of successful experiments. It asked the researchers to choose 
sample sizes, to assess the risks of failure to which their decisions 
exposed them, and to provide advice to hypothetical graduate students 
planning their research. Amos collected the responses of a group of 



sophisticated participants (including authors of two statistical textbooks) at 
a meetatipp&gt; 

Amos and I called our first joint article “Belief in the Law of Small 
Numbers.” We explained, tongue-in-cheek, that “intuitions about random 
sampling appear to satisfy the law of small numbers, which asserts that the 
law of large numbers applies to small numbers as well.” We also included 
a strongly worded recommendation that researchers regard their 
“statistical intuitions with proper suspicion and replace impression 
formation by computation whenever possible.” 

A Bias of Confidence Over Doubt 


In a telephone poll of 300 seniors, 60% support the president. 

If you had to summarize the message of this sentence in exactly three 
words, what would they be? Almost certainly you would choose “elderly 
support president.” These words provide the gist of the story. The omitted 
details of the poll, that it was done on the phone with a sample of 300, are 
of no interest in themselves; they provide background information that 
attracts little attention. Your summary would be the same if the sample size 
had been different. Of course, a completely absurd number would draw 
your attention (“a telephone poll of 6 [or 60 million] elderly voters...”). 
Unless you are a professional, however, you may not react very differently 
to a sample of 150 and to a sample of 3,000. That is the meaning of the 
statement that “people are not adequately sensitive to sample size.” 

The message about the poll contains information of two kinds: the story 
and the source of the story. Naturally, you focus on the story rather than on 
the reliability of the results. When the reliability is obviously low, however, 
the message will be discredited. If you are told that “a partisan group has 
conducted a flawed and biased poll to show that the elderly support the 
president...” you will of course reject the findings of the poll, and they will 
not become part of what you believe. Instead, the partisan poll and its false 
results will become a new story about political lies. You can choose to 
disbelieve a message in such clear-cut cases. But do you discriminate 
sufficiently between “I read in The New York Times..." and “I heard at the 
watercooler...”? Can your System 1 distinguish degrees of belief? The 
principle of WYSIATI suggests that it cannot. 

As I described earlier, System 1 is not prone to doubt. It suppresses 
ambiguity and spontaneously constructs stories that are as coherent as 
possible. Unless the message is immediately negated, the associations 



that it evokes will spread as if the message were true. System 2 is capable 
of doubt, because it can maintain incompatible possibilities at the same 
time. However, sustaining doubt is harder work than sliding into certainty. 
The law of small numbers is a manifestation of a general bias that favors 
certainty over doubt, which will turn up in many guises in following chapters. 

The strong bias toward believing that small samples closely resemble 
the population from which they are drawn is also part of a larger story: we 
are prone to exaggerate the consistency and coherence of what we see. 
The exaggerated faith of researchers in what can be learned from a few 
observations is closely related to the halo effect thphe , the sense we often 
get that we know and understand a person about whom we actually know 
very little. System 1 runs ahead of the facts in constructing a rich image on 
the basis of scraps of evidence. A machine for jumping to conclusions will 
act as if it believed in the law of small numbers. More generally, it will 
produce a representation of reality that makes too much sense. 

Cause and Chance 

The associative machinery seeks causes. The difficulty we have with 
statistical regularities is that they call for a different approach. Instead of 
focusing on how the event at hand came to be, the statistical view relates it 
to what could have happened instead. Nothing in particular caused it to be 
what it is—chance selected it from among its alternatives. 

Our predilection for causal thinking exposes us to serious mistakes in 
evaluating the randomness of truly random events. For an example, take 
the sex of six babies born in sequence at a hospital. The sequence of boys 
and girls is obviously random; the events are independent of each other, 
and the number of boys and girls who were born in the hospital in the last 
few hours has no effect whatsoever on the sex of the next baby. Now 
consider three possible sequences: 

BBBGGG 

GGGGGG 

BGBBGB 

Are the sequences equally likely? The intuitive answer—“of course not!”— 
is false. Because the events are independent and because the outcomes 
B and G are (approximately) equally likely, then any possible sequence of 
six births is as likely as any other. Even now that you know this conclusion 
is true, it remains counterintuitive, because only the third sequence 
appears random. As expected, BGBBGB is judged much more likely than 



the other two sequences. We are pattern seekers, believers in a coherent 
world, in which regularities (such as a sequence of six girls) appear not by 
accident but as a result of mechanical causality or of someone’s intention. 
We do not expect to see regularity produced by a random process, and 
when we detect what appears to be a rule, we quickly reject the idea that 
the process is truly random. Random processes produce many sequences 
that convince people that the process is not random after all. You can see 
why assuming causality could have had evolutionary advantages. It is part 
of the general vigilance that we have inherited from ancestors. We are 
automatically on the lookout for the possibility that the environment has 
changed. Lions may appear on the plain at random times, but it would be 
safer to notice and respond to an apparent increase in the rate of 
appearance of prides of lions, even if it is actually due to the fluctuations of 
a random process. 

The widespread misunderstanding of randomness sometimes has 
significant consequences. In our article on representativeness, Amos and I 
cited the statistician William Feller, who illustrated the ease with which 
people see patterns where none exists. During the intensive rocket 
bombing of London in World War II, it was generally believed that the 
bombing could not be random because a map of the hits revealed 
conspicuous gaps. Some suspected that German spies were located in 
the unharmed areas. A careful statistical analysis revealed that the 
distribution of hits was typical of a random process—and typical as well in 
evoking a strong impression that it was not random. “To the untrained eye,” 
Feller remarks, “randomness appears as regularity or tendency to cluster.” 

I soon had an occasion to apply what I had learned frpeaprainom Feller. 
The Yom Kippur War broke out in 1973, and my only significant 
contribution to the war effort was to advise high officers in the Israeli Air 
Force to stop an investigation. The air war initially went quite badly for 
Israel, because of the unexpectedly good performance of Egyptian ground- 
to-air missiles. Losses were high, and they appeared to be unevenly 
distributed. I was told of two squadrons flying from the same base, one of 
which had lost four planes while the other had lost none. An inquiry was 
initiated in the hope of learning what it was that the unfortunate squadron 
was doing wrong. There was no prior reason to believe that one of the 
squadrons was more effective than the other, and no operational 
differences were found, but of course the lives of the pilots differed in many 
random ways, including, as I recall, how often they went home between 
missions and something about the conduct of debriefings. My advice was 
that the command should accept that the different outcomes were due to 
blind luck, and that the interviewing of the pilots should stop. I reasoned 
that luck was the most likely answer, that a random search for a 



nonobvious cause was hopeless, and that in the meantime the pilots in the 
squadron that had sustained losses did not need the extra burden of being 
made to feel that they and their dead friends were at fault. 

Some years later, Amos and his students Tom Gilovich and Robert 
Vallone caused a stir with their study of misperceptions of randomness in 
basketball. The “fact" that players occasionally acquire a hot hand is 
generally accepted by players, coaches, and fans. The inference is 
irresistible: a player sinks three or four baskets in a row and you cannot 
help forming the causal judgment that this player is now hot, with a 
temporarily increased propensity to score. Players on both teams adapt to 
this judgment—teammates are more likely to pass to the hot scorer and 
the defense is more likely to doubleteam. Analysis of thousands of 
sequences of shots led to a disappointing conclusion: there is no such 
thing as a hot hand in professional basketball, either in shooting from the 
field or scoring from the foul line. Of course, some players are more 
accurate than others, but the sequence of successes and missed shots 
satisfies all tests of randomness. The hot hand is entirely in the eye of the 
beholders, who are consistently too quick to perceive order and causality 
in randomness. The hot hand is a massive and widespread cognitive 
illusion. 

The public reaction to this research is part of the story. The finding was 
picked up by the press because of its surprising conclusion, and the 
general response was disbelief. When the celebrated coach of the Boston 
Celtics, Red Auerbach, heard of Gilovich and his study, he responded, 
“Who is this guy? So he makes a study. I couldn’t care less.” The tendency 
to see patterns in randomness is overwhelming—certainly more 
impressive than a guy making a study. 

The illusion of pattern affects our lives in many ways off the basketball 
court. How many good years should you wait before concluding that an 
investment adviser is unusually skilled? How many successful acquisitions 
should be needed for a board of directors to believe that the CEO has 
extraordinary flair for such deals? The simple answer to these questions is 
that if you follow your intuition, you will more often than not err by 
misclassifying a random event as systematic. We are far too willing to 
reject the belief that much of what we see in life is random. 

I began this chapter with the example of cancer incidence across the 
United States. The example appears in a book intended for statistics 
teachers, but I learned about it from an amusing article by the two 
statisticians I quoted earlier, Howard Wainer and Harris Zwerling. Their 
essay focused on a large iivepothersnvestment, some $1.7 billion, which 
the Gates Foundation made to follow up intriguing findings on the 



characteristics of the most successful schools. Many researchers have 
sought the secret of successful education by identifying the most 
successful schools in the hope of discovering what distinguishes them 
from others. One of the conclusions of this research is that the most 
successful schools, on average, are small. In a survey of 1,662 schools in 
Pennsylvania, for instance, 6 of the top 50 were small, which is an 
overrepresentation by a factor of 4. These data encouraged the Gates 
Foundation to make a substantial investment in the creation of small 
schools, sometimes by splitting large schools into smaller units. At least 
half a dozen other prominent institutions, such as the Annenberg 
Foundation and the Pew Charitable Trust, joined the effort, as did the U.S. 
Department of Education’s Smaller Learning Communities Program. 

This probably makes intuitive sense to you. It is easy to construct a 
causal story that explains how small schools are able to provide superior 
education and thus produce high-achieving scholars by giving them more 
personal attention and encouragement than they could get in larger 
schools. Unfortunately, the causal analysis is pointless because the facts 
are wrong. If the statisticians who reported to the Gates Foundation had 
asked about the characteristics of the worst schools, they would have 
found that bad schools also tend to be smaller than average. The truth is 
that small schools are not better on average; they are simply more 
variable. If anything, say Wainer and Zwerling, large schools tend to 
produce better results, especially in higher grades where a variety of 
curricular options is valuable. 

Thanks to recent advances in cognitive psychology, we can now see 
clearly what Amos and I could only glimpse: the law of small numbers is 
part of two larger stories about the workings of the mind. 


• The exaggerated faith in small samples is only one example of a 
more general illusion—we pay more attention to the content of 
messages than to information about their reliability, and as a result 
end up with a view of the world around us that is simpler and more 
coherent than the data justify. Jumping to conclusions is a safer sport 
in the world of our imagination than it is in reality. 

• Statistics produce many observations that appear to beg for causal 
explanations but do not lend themselves to such explanations. Many 
facts of the world are due to chance, including accidents of sampling. 
Causal explanations of chance events are inevitably wrong. 



Speaking of the Law of Small Numbers 


“Yes, the studio has had three successful films since the new 
CEO took over. But it is too early to declare he has a hot hand.” 


“I won’t believe that the new trader is a genius before consulting a 
statistician who could estimate the likelihood of his streak being 
a chance event.” 


“The sample of observations is too small to make any inferences. 
Let’s not follow the law of small numbers.” 


“I plan to keep the results of the experiment secret until we have a 
sufficiently large sample. Otherwisortpxpere we will face pressure 
to reach a conclusion prematurely.” 



Anchors 


Amos and I once rigged a wheel of fortune. It was marked from 0 to 100, 
but we had it built so that it would stop only at 10 or 65. We recruited 
students of the University of Oregon as participants in our experiment. One 
of us would stand in front of a small group, spin the wheel, and ask them to 
write down the number on which the wheel stopped, which of course was 
either 10 or 65. We then asked them two questions: 

Is the percentage of African nations among UN members larger 
or smaller than the number you just wrote? 


What is your best guess of the percentage of African nations in 
the UN? 

The spin of a wheel of fortune—even one that is not rigged—cannot 
possibly yield useful information about anything, and the participants in our 
experiment should simply have ignored it. But they did not ignore it. The 
average estimates of those who saw 10 and 65 were 25% and 45%, 
respectively. 

The phenomenon we were studying is so common and so important in 
the everyday world that you should know its name: it is an anchoring effect. 
It occurs when people consider a particular value for an unknown quantity 
before estimating that quantity. What happens is one of the most reliable 
and robust results of experimental psychology: the estimates stay close to 
the number that people considered—hence the image of an anchor. If you 
are asked whether Gandhi was more than 114 years old when he died you 
will end up with a much higher estimate of his age at death than you would 
if the anchoring question referred to death at 35. If you consider how much 
you should pay for a house, you will be influenced by the asking price. The 
same house will appear more valuable if its listing price is high than if it is 
low, even if you are determined to resist the influence of this number; and 
so on—the list of anchoring effects is endless. Any number that you are 
asked to consider as a possible solution to an estimation problem will 
induce an anchoring effect. 

We were not the first to observe the effects of anchors, but our 
experiment was the first demonstration of its absurdity: people’s judgments 
were influenced by an obviously uninformative number. There was no way 
to describe the anchoring effect of a wheel of fortune as reasonable. Amos 
and I published the experiment in our Science paper, and it is one of the 



best known of the findings we reported there. 

There was only one trouble: Amos and I did not fully agree on the 
psychology of the anchoring effect. He supported one interpretation, I liked 
another, and we never found a way to settle the argument. The problem 
was finally solved decades later by the efforts of numerous investigators. It 
is now clear that Amos and I were both right. Two different mechanisms 
produce anchoring effects—one for each system. There is a form of 
anchoring that occurs in a deliberate process of adjustment, an operation 
of System 2. And there is anchoring that occurs by a priming effect, an 
automatic manifestation of System 1. 

Anchoring as Adjustment 

Amos liked the idea of an adjust-and-anchor heuristic as a strategy for 
estimating uncertain quantities: start from an anchoring number, assess 
whether it is too high or too low, and gradually adjust your estimate by 
mentally “moving” from the anchor. The adjustment typically ends 
prematurely, because people stop when they are no longer certain that 
they should move farther. Decades after our disagreement, and years after 
Amos’s death, convincing evidence of such a process was offered 
independently by two psychologists who had worked closely with Amos 
early in their careers: Eldar Shafir and Tom Gilovich together with their own 
students—Amos’s intellectual grandchildren! 

To get the idea, take a sheet of paper and draw a 2%-inch line going up, 
starting at the bottom of the page—without a ruler. Now take another sheet, 
and start at the top and draw a line going down until it is 2!4 inches from 
the bottom. Compare the lines. There is a good chance that your first 
estimate of 2!4 inches was shorter than the second. The reason is that you 
do not know exactly what such a line looks like; there is a range of 
uncertainty. \bu stop near the bottom of the region of uncertainty when you 
start from the bottom of the page and near the top of the region when you 
start from the top. Robyn Le Boeuf and Shafir found many examples of that 
mechanism in daily experience. Insufficient adjustment neatly explains why 
you are likely to drive too fast when you come off the highway onto city 
streets—especially if you are talking with someone as you drive. 
Insufficient adjustment is also a source of tension between exasperated 
parents and teenagers who enjoy loud music in their room. Le Boeuf and 
Shafir note that a “well-intentioned child who turns down exceptionally loud 
music to meet a parent’s demand that it be played at a ‘reasonable’ 
volume may fail to adjust sufficiently from a high anchor, and may feel that 
genuine attempts at compromise are being overlooked.” The driver and 



the child both deliberately adjust down, and both fail to adjust enough. 

Now consider these questions: 

When did George Washington become president? 

What is the boiling temperature of water at the top of Mount 

Everest? 

The first thing that happens when you consider each of these questi
ons is 
that an anchor comes to your mind, and you know both that it is wrong and 
the direction of the correct answer. You know immediately that George 
Washington became president after 1776, and you also know that the 
boiling temperature of water at the top of Mount Everest is lower than 
100°C. You have to adjust in the appropriate direction by finding 
arguments to move away from the anchor. As in the case of the lines, you 
are likely to stop when you are no longer sure you should go farther—at the 
near edge of the region of uncertainty. 


Nick Epley and Tom Gilovich found evidence that adjustment is a 
deliberate attempt to find reasons to move away from the anchor: people 
who are instructed to shake their head when they hear the anchor, as if 
they rejected it, move farther from the anchor, and people who nod their 
head show enhanced anchoring. Epley and Gilovich also confirmed that 
adjustment is an effortful operation. People adjust less (stay closer to the 
anchor) when their mental resources are depleted, either because their 
memory is loaded with dighdth=igits or because they are slightly drunk. 
Insufficient adjustment is a failure of a weak or lazy System 2. 

So we now know that Amos was right for at least some cases of 
anchoring, which involve a deliberate System 2 adjustment in a specified 
direction from an anchor. 

Anchoring as Priming Effect 

When Amos and I debated anchoring, I agreed that adjustment sometimes 
occurs, but I was uneasy. Adjustment is a deliberate and conscious 
activity, but in most cases of anchoring there is no corresponding 
subjective experience. Consider these two questions: 

Was Gandhi more or less than 144 years old when he died? 

How old was Gandhi when he died? 


Did you produce your estimate by adjusting down from 144? Probably not, 



but the absurdly high number still affected your estimate. My hunch was that 
anchoring is a case of suggestion. This is the word we use when someone 
causes us to see, hear, or feel something by merely bringing it to mind. For 
example, the question “Do you now feel a slight numbness in your left leg?” 
always prompts quite a few people to report that their left leg does indeed 
feel a little strange. 

Amos was more conservative than I was about hunches, and he correctly 
pointed out that appealing to suggestion did not help us understand 
anchoring, because we did not know how to explain suggestion. I had to 
agree that he was right, but I never became enthusiastic about the idea of 
insufficient adjustment as the sole cause of anchoring effects. We 
conducted many inconclusive experiments in an effort to understand 
anchoring, but we failed and eventually gave up the idea of writing more 
about it. 

The puzzle that defeated us is now solved, because the concept of 
suggestion is no longer obscure: suggestion is a priming effect, which 
selectively evokes compatible evidence. You did not believe for a moment 
that Gandhi lived for 144 years, but your associative machinery surely 
generated an impression of a very ancient person. System 1 understands 
sentences by trying to make them true, and the selective activation of 
compatible thoughts produces a family of systematic errors that make us 
gullible and prone to believe too strongly whatever we believe. We can now 
see why Amos and I did not realize that there were two types of anchoring: 
the research techniques and theoretical ideas we needed did not yet exist. 
They were developed, much later, by other people. A process that 
resembles suggestion is indeed at work in many situations: System 1 tries 
its best to construct a world in which the anchor is the true number. This is 
one of the manifestations of associative coherence that I described in the 
first part of the book. 

The German psychologists Thomas Mussweiler and Fritz Strack offered 
the most compelling demonstrations of the role of associative coherence 
in anchoring. In one experiment, they asked an anchoring question about 
temperature: “Is the annual mean temperature in Germany higher or lower 
than 20°C (68°F)?” or “Is the annual mean temperature in Germany higher 
or lower than 5°C (40°F)?” 

All participants were then briefly shown words that they were asked to 
identify. The researchers found that 68°F made it easier to recognize 
summer words (like sun and beach), and 40°F facilitated winter words 
(like frost and ski). The selective activation of compatible memories 
explains anchoring: the high and the low numbers activate different sets of 
ideas in memory. The estimates of annual temperature draw on these 



biased samples of ideas and are therefore biased as well. In another 
elegant study in the same vein, participants were asked about the average 
price of German cars. A high anchor selectively primed the names of luxury 
brands (Mercedes, Audi), whereas the low anchor primed brands 
associated with mass-market cars (Volkswagen). We saw earlier that any 
prime will tend to evoke information that is compatible with it. Suggestion 
and anchoring are both explained by the same automatic operation of 
System 1. Although I did not know how to prove it at the time, my hunch 
about the link between anchoring and suggestion turned out to be correct. 

The Anchoring Index 

Many psychological phenomena can be demonstrated experimentally, but 
few can actually be measured. The effect of anchors is an exception. 
Anchoring can be measured, and it is an impressively large effect. Some 
visitors at the San Francisco Exploratorium were asked the following two 
questions: 

Is the height of the tallest redwood more or less than 1,200 feet? 

What is your best guess about the height of the tallest redwood? 

The “high anchor” in this experiment was 1,200 feet. For other participants, 
the first question referred to a “low anchor” of 180 feet. The difference 
between the two anchors was 1,020 feet. 

As expected, the two groups produced very different mean estimates: 
844 and 282 feet. The difference between them was 562 feet. The 
anchoring index is simply the ratio of the two differences (562/1,020) 
expressed as a percentage: 55%. The anchoring measure would be 100% 
for people who slavishly adopt the anchor as an estimate, and zero for 
people who are able to ignore the anchor altogether. The value of 55% that 
was observed in this example is typical. Similar values have been 
observed in numerous other problems. 

The anchoring effect is not a laboratory curiosity; it can be just as strong 
in the real world. In an experiment conducted some years ago, real-estate 
agents were given an opportunity to assess the value of a house that was 
actually on the market. They visited the house and studied a 
comprehensive booklet of information that included an asking price. Half 
the agents saw an asking price that was substantially higher than the listed 
price of the house; the other half saw an asking price that was substantially 
lower. Each agent gave her opinion about a reasonable buying price for 
the house and the lowest price at which she would agree to sell the house 
if she owned it. The agents were then asked about the factors that had 



affected their judgment. Remarkably, the asking price was not one of these 
factors; the agents took pride in their ability to ignore it. They insisted that 
the listing price had no effect on their responses, but they were wrong: the 
anchoring effect was 41%. Indeed, the professionals were almost as 
susceptible to anchoring effects as business school students with no real- 
estate experience, whose anchoring index was 48%. The only difference 
between the two groups was that the students conceded that they were 
influenced by the anchor, while the professionals denied that influence. 

Powerful anchoring effects are found in decisions that people make 
about money, such as when they choose how much to contribute al.ls 
denied to a cause. To demonstrate this effect, we told participants in the 
Exploratorium study about the environmental damage caused by oil 
tankers in the Pacific Ocean and asked about their willingness to make an 
annual contribution “to save 50,000 offshore Pacific Coast seabirds from 
small offshore oil spills, until ways are found to prevent spills or require 
tanker owners to pay for the operation.” This question requires intensity 
matching: the respondents are asked, in effect, to find the dollar amount of 
a contribution that matches the intensity of their feelings about the plight of 
the seabirds. Some of the visitors were first asked an anchoring question, 
such as, “Would you be willing to pay $5...,” before the point-blank 
question of how much they would contribute. 

When no anchor was mentioned, the visitors at the Exploratorium— 
generally an environmentally sensitive crowd—said they were willing to pay 
$64, on average. When the anchoring amount was only $5, contributions 
averaged $20. When the anchor was a rather extravagant $400, the 
willingness to pay rose to an average of $143. 

The difference between the high-anchor and low-anchor groups was 
$123. The anchoring effect was above 30%, indicating that increasing the 
initial request by $100 brought a return of $30 in average willingness to 
pay. 

Similar or even larger anchoring effects have been obtained in 
numerous studies of estimates and of willingness to pay. For example, 
French residents of the heavily polluted Marseilles region were asked what 
increase in living costs they would accept if they could live in a less 
polluted region. The anchoring effect was over 50% in that study. 
Anchoring effects are easily observed in online trading, where the same 
item is often offered at different “buy now” prices. The “estimate” in fine-art 
auctions is also an anchor that influences the first bid. 

There are situations in which anchoring appears reasonable. After all, it 
is not surprising that people who are asked difficult questions clutch at 
straws, and the anchor is a plausible straw. If you know next to nothing 



about the trees of California and are asked whether a redwood can be 
taller than 1,200 feet, you might infer that this number is not too far from the 
truth. Somebody who knows the true height thought up that question, so the 
anchor may be a valuable hint. However, a key finding of anchoring 
research is that anchors that are obviously random can be just as effective 
as potentially informative anchors. When we used a wheel of fortune to 
anchor estimates of the proportion of African nations in the UN, the 
anchoring index was 44%, well within the range of effects observed with 
anchors that could plausibly be taken as hints. Anchoring effects of similar 
size have been observed in experiments in which the last few digits of the 
respondent’s Social Security number was used as the anchor (e.g., for 
estimating the number of physicians in their city). The conclusion is clear: 
anchors do not have their effects because people believe they are 
informative. 

The power of random anchors has been demonstrated in some 
unsettling ways. German judges with an average of more than fifteen years 
of experience on the bench first read a description of a woman who had 
been caught shoplifting, then rolled a pair of dice that were loaded so 
every roll resulted in either a 3 or a 9. As soon as the dice came to a stop, 
the judges were asked whether they would sentence the woman to a term 
in prison greater or lesser, in months, than the number showing on the 
dice. Finally, the judges were instructed to specify the exact prison 
sentence they would give to the shoplifter. On average, those who had 
rolled a 9 said they would sentence her to 8 months; those who rolled a 3 
saidthif Africa they would sentence her to 5 months; the anchoring effect 
was 50%. 


Uses and Abuses of Anchors 

By now you should be convinced that anchoring effects—sometimes due 
to priming, sometimes to insufficient adjustment—are everywhere. The 
psychological mechanisms that produce anchoring make us far more 
suggestible than most of us would want to be. And of course there are 
quite a few people who are willing and able to exploit our gullibility. 

Anchoring effects explain why, for example, arbitrary rationing is an 
effective marketing ploy. A few years ago, supermarket shoppers in Sioux 
City, Iowa, encountered a sales promotion for Campbell’s soup at about 
10% off the regular price. On some days, a sign on the shelf said limit of 
12 per person. On other days, the sign said no limit per person. Shoppers 
purchased an average of 7 cans when the limit was in force, twice as many 
as they bought when the limit was removed. Anchoring is not the sole 



explanation. Rationing also implies that the goods are flying off the 
shelves, and shoppers should feel some urgency about stocking up. But 
we also know that the mention of 12 cans as a possible purchase would 
produce anchoring even if the number were produced by a roulette wheel. 

We see the same strategy at work in the negotiation over the price of a 
home, when the seller makes the first move by setting the list price. As in 
many other games, moving first is an advantage in single-issue 
negotiations—for example, when price is the only issue to be settled 
between a buyer and a seller. As you may have experienced when 
negotiating for the first time in a bazaar, the initial anchor has a powerful 
effect. My advice to students when I taught negotiations was that if you 
think the other side has made an outrageous proposal, you should not 
come back with an equally outrageous counteroffer, creating a gap that will 
be difficult to bridge in further negotiations. Instead you should make a 
scene, storm out or threaten to do so, and make it clear—to yourself as 
well as to the other side—that you will not continue the negotiation with that 
number on the table. 

The psychologists Adam Galinsky and Thomas Mussweiler proposed 
more subtle ways to resist the anchoring effect in negotiations. They 
instructed negotiators to focus their attention and search their memory for 
arguments against the anchor. The instruction to activate System 2 was 
successful. For example, the anchoring effect is reduced or eliminated 
when the second mover focuses his attention on the minimal offer that the 
opponent would accept, or on the costs to the opponent of failing to reach 
an agreement. In general, a strategy of deliberately “thinking the opposite” 
may be a good defense against anchoring effects, because it negates the 
biased recruitment of thoughts that produces these effects. 

Finally, try your hand at working out the effect of anchoring on a problem 
of public policy: the size of damages in personal injury cases. These 
awards are sometimes very large. Businesses that are frequent targets of 
such lawsuits, such as hospitals and chemical companies, have lobbied to 
set a cap on the awards. Before you read this chapter you might have 
thought that capping awards is certainly good for potential defendants, but 
now you should not be so sure. Consider the effect of capping awards at 
$1 million. This rule would eliminate all larger awards, but the anchor would 
also pull up the size of many awards that would otherwise be much smaller. 
It would almost certainly benefit serious offenders and large firms much 
more than small ones. 


Anchoring and the Two Systems 



The effects of random anchors have much to tell us about the relationship 
between System 1 and System 2. Anchoring effects have always been 
studied in tasks of judgment and choice that are ultimately completed by 
System 2. However, System 2 works on data that is retrieved from 
memory, in an automatic and involuntary operation of System 1. System 2 
is therefore susceptible to the biasing influence of anchors that make 
some information easier to retrieve. Furthermore, System 2 has no control 
over the effect and no knowledge of it. The participants who have been 
exposed to random or absurd anchors (such as Gandhi’s death at age 
144) confidently deny that this obviously useless information could have 
influenced their estimate, and they are wrong. 

We saw in the discussion of the law of small numbers that a message, 
unless it is immediately rejected as a lie, will have the same effect on the 
associative system regardless of its reliability. The gist of the message is 
the story, which is based on whatever information is available, even if the 
quantity of the information is slight and its quality is poor: WYSIATI. When 
you read a story about the heroic rescue of a wounded mountain climber, 
its effect on your associative memory is much the same if it is a news 
report or the synopsis of a film. Anchoring results from this associative 
activation. Whether the story is true, or believable, matters little, if at all. 
The powerful effect of random anchors is an extreme case of this 
phenomenon, because a random anchor obviously provides no information 
at all. 

Earlier I discussed the bewildering variety of priming effects, in which 
your thoughts and behavior may be influenced by stimuli to which you pay 
no attention at all, and even by stimuli of which you are completely 
unaware. The main moral of priming research is that our thoughts and our 
behavior are influenced, much more than we know or want, by the 
environment of the moment. Many people find the priming results 
unbelievable, because they do not correspond to subjective experience. 
Many others find the results upsetting, because they threaten the subjective 
sense of agency and autonomy. If the content of a screen saver on an 
irrelevant computer can affect your willingness to help strangers without 
your being aware of it, how free are you? Anchoring effects are threatening 
in a similar way. \bu are always aware of the anchor and even pay 
attention to it, but you do not know how it guides and constrains your 
thinking, because you cannot imagine how you would have thought if the 
anchor had been different (or absent). However, you should assume that 
any number that is on the table has had an anchoring effect on you, and if 
the stakes are high you should mobilize yourself (your System 2) to combat 
the effect. 



Speaking of Anchors 


“The firm we want to acquire sent us their business plan, with the 
revenue they expect. We shouldn’t let that number influence our 
thinking. Set it aside.” 


“Plans are best-case scenarios. Let’s avoid anchoring on plans 
when we forecast actual outcomes. Thinking about ways the plan 
could go wrong is one way to do it.” 


“Our aim in the negotiation is to get them anchored on this 
number.” 


&amp; st 


“The defendant’s lawyers put in a frivolous reference in which they 
mentioned a ridiculously low amount of damages, and they got 
the judge anchored on it!” 



The Science of Availability 


Amos and I had our most productive year in 1971-72, which we spent in 
Eugene, Oregon. We were the guests of the Oregon Research Institute, 
which housed several future stars of ail the fields in which we worked— 
judgment, decision making, and intuitive prediction. Our main host was 
Paul Slovic, who had been Amos’s classmate at Ann Arbor and remained 
a lifelong friend. Paul was on his way to becoming the leading psychologist 
among scholars of risk, a position he has held for decades, collecting 
many honors along the way. Paul and his wife, Roz, introduced us to life in 
Eugene, and soon we were doing what people in Eugene do—jogging, 
barbecuing, and taking children to basketball games. We also worked very 
hard, running dozens of experiments and writing our articles on judgment 
heuristics. At night I wrote Attention and Effort. It was a busy year. 

One of our projects was the study of what we called the availability 
heuristic. We thought of that heuristic when we asked ourselves what 
people actually do when they wish to estimate the frequency of a category, 
such as “people who divorce after the age of 60” or “dangerous plants.” 
The answer was straightforward: instances of the class will be retrieved 
from memory, and if retrieval is easy and fluent, the category will be judged 
to be large. We defined the availability heuristic as the process of judging 
frequency by “the ease with which instances come to mind.” The statement 
seemed clear when we formulated it, but the concept of availability has 
been refined since then. The two-system approach had not yet been 
developed when we studied availability, and we did not attempt to 
determine whether this heuristic is a deliberate problem-solving strategy or 
an automatic operation. We now know that both systems are involved. 

A question we considered early was how many instances must be 
retrieved to get an impression of the ease with which they come to mind. 
We now know the answer: none. For an example, think of the number of 
words that can be constructed from the two sets of letters below. 

XUZONLCJM 

TAPCERHOB 

You knew almost immediately, without generating any instances, that one 
set offers far more possibilities than the other, probably by a factor of 10 or 
more. Similarly, you do not need to retrieve specific news stories to have a 
good idea of the relative frequency with which different countries have 
appeared in the news during the past year (Belgium, China, France, 
Congo, Nicaragua, Romania...). 



The availability heuristic, like other heuristics of judgment, substitutes 
one question for another: you wish to estimate the size se ost c d of a 
category or the frequency of an event, but you report an impression of the 
ease with which instances come to mind. Substitution of questions 
inevitably produces systematic errors. &gt;bu can discover how the heuristic 
leads to biases by following a simple procedure: list factors other than 
frequency that make it easy to come up with instances. Each factor in your 
list will be a potential source of bias. Here are some examples: 


• A salient event that attracts your attention will be easily retrieved from 
memory. Divorces among Hollywood celebrities and sex scandals 
among politicians attract much attention, and instances will come 
easily to mind. You are therefore likely to exaggerate the frequency of 
both Hollywood divorces and political sex scandals. 

• A dramatic event temporarily increases the availability of its 
category. A plane crash that attracts media coverage will temporarily 
alter your feelings about the safety of flying. Accidents are on your 
mind, for a while, after you see a car burning at the side of the road, 
and the world is for a while a more dangerous place. 

• Personal experiences, pictures, and vivid examples are more 
available than incidents that happened to others, or mere words, or 
statistics. A judicial error that affects you will undermine your faith in 
the justice system more than a similar incident you read about in a 
newspaper. 


Resisting this large collection of potential availability biases is possible, 
but tiresome. You must make the effort to reconsider your impressions and 
intuitions by asking such questions as, “Is our belief that theft s by 
teenagers are a major problem due to a few recent instances in our 
neighborhood?” or “Could it be that I feel no need to get a flu shot because 
none of my acquaintances got the flu last year?” Maintaining one’s 
vigilance against biases is a chore—but the chance to avoid a costly 
mistake is sometimes worth the effort. 

One of the best-known studies of availability suggests that awareness of 
your own biases can contribute to peace in marriages, and probably in 
other joint projects. In a famous study, spouses were asked, “How large 
was your personal contribution to keeping the place tidy, in percentages?” 
They also answered similar questions about “taking out the garbage,” 
“initiating social engagements,” etc. Would the self-estimated contributions 



add up to 100%, or more, or less? As expected, the self-assessed 
contributions added up to more than 100%. The explanation is a simple 
availability bias: both spouses remember their own individual efforts and 
contributions much more clearly than those of the other, and the difference 
in availability leads to a difference in judged frequency. The bias is not 
necessarily self-serving: spouses also overestimated their contribution to 
causing quarrels, although to a smaller extent than their contributions to 
more desirable outcomes. The same bias contributes to the common 
observation that many members of a collaborative team feel they have 
done more than their share and also feel that the others are not adequately 
grateful for their individual contributions. 

I am generally not optimistic about the potential for personal control of 
biases, but this is an exception. The opportunity for successful debiasing 
exists because the circumstances in which issues of credit allocation 
come up are easy to identify, the more so because tensions often arise 
when several people at once feel that their efforts are not adequately 
recognized. The mere observation that there is usually more than 100% 
credit to go around is sometimes sufficient to defuse the situation. In any 
eve#82ght=nt, it is a good thing for every individual to remember. You will 
occasionally do more than your share, but it is useful to know that you are 
likely to have that feeling even when each member of the team feels the 
same way. 


The Psychology of Availability 

A major advance in the understanding of the availability heuristic occurred 
in the early 1990s, when a group of German psychologists led by Norbert 
Schwarz raised an intriguing question: How will people’s impressions of 
the frequency of a category be affected by a requirement to list a specified 
number of instances? Imagine yourself a subject in that experiment: 

First, list six instances in which you behaved assertively. 

Next, evaluate how assertive you are. 

Imagine that you had been asked for twelve instances of assertive 
behavior (a number most people find difficult). Would your view of your own 
assertiveness be different? 

Schwarz and his colleagues observed that the task of listing instances 
may enhance the judgments of the trait by two different routes: 



• the number of instances retrieved 

• the ease with which they come to mind 


The request to list twelve instances pits the two determinants against each 
other. On the one hand, you have just retrieved an impressive number of 
cases in which you were assertive. On the other hand, while the first three 
or four instances of your own assertiveness probably came easily to you, 
you almost certainly struggled to come up with the last few to complete a 
set of twelve; fluency was low. Which will count more—the amount retrieved 
or the ease and fluency of the retrieval? 

The contest yielded a clear-cut winner: people who had just listed twelve 
instances rated themselves as less assertive than people who had listed 
only six. Furthermore, participants who had been asked to list twelve cases 
in which they had not behaved assertively ended up thinking of themselves 
as quite assertive! If you cannot easily come up with instances of meek 
behavior, you are likely to conclude that you are not meek at all. Self- 
ratings were dominated by the ease with which examples had come to 
mind. The experience of fluent retrieval of instances trumped the number 
retrieved. 

An even more direct demonstration of the role of fluency was offered by 
other psychologists in the same group. All the participants in their 
experiment listed six instances of assertive (or nonassertive) behavior, 
while maintaining a specified facial expression. “Smilers” were instructed 
to contract the zygomaticus muscle, which produces a light smile; 
“frowners” were required to furrow their brow. As you already know, 
frowning normally accompanies cognitive strain and the effect is 
symmetric: when people are instructed to frown while doing a task, they 
actually try harder and experience greater cognitive strain. The 
researchers anticipated that the frowners would have more difficulty 
retrieving examples of assertive behavior and would therefore rate 
themselves as relatively lacking in assertiveness. And so it was. 


Psychologists enjoy experiments that yield paradoxical results, and they 
have appliserv heighted Schwarz’s discovery with gusto. For example, 
people: 


• believe that they use their bicycles less often after recalling many 
rather than few instances 



• are less confident in a choice when they are asked to produce more 
arguments to support it 

• are less confident that an event was avoidable after listing more 
ways it could have been avoided 

• are less impressed by a car after listing many of its advantages 


A professor at UCLA found an ingenious way to exploit the availability 
bias. He asked different groups of students to list ways to improve the 
course, and he varied the required number of improvements. As expected, 
the students who listed more ways to improve the class rated it higher! 

Perhaps the most interesting finding of this paradoxical research is that 
the paradox is not always found: people sometimes go by content rather 
than by ease of retrieval. The proof that you truly understand a pattern of 
behavior is that you know how to reverse it. Schwarz and his colleagues 
took on this challenge of discovering the conditions under which this 
reversal would take place. 

The ease with which instances of assertiveness come to the subject’s 
mind changes during the task. The first few instances are easy, but 
retrieval soon becomes much harder. Of course, the subject also expects 
fluency to drop gradually, but the drop of fluency between six and twelve 
instances appears to be steeper than the participant expected. The results 
suggest that the participants make an inference: if I am having so much 
more trouble than expected coming up with instances of my assertiveness, 
then I can’t be very assertive. Note that this inference rests on a surprise— 
fluency being worse than expected. The availability heuristic that the 
subjects apply is better described as an “unexplained unavailability” 
heuristic. 

Schwarz and his colleagues reasoned that they could disrupt the 
heuristic by providing the subjects with an explanation for the fluency of 
retrieval that they experienced. They told the participants they would hear 
background music while recalling instances and that the music would affect 
performance in the memory task. Some subjects were told that the music 
would help, others were told to expect diminished fluency. As predicted, 
participants whose experience of fluency was “explained” did not use it as 
a heuristic; the subjects who were told that music would make retrieval 
more difficult rated themselves as equally assertive when they retrieved 
twelve instances as when they retrieved six. Other cover stories have been 
used with the same result: judgments are no longer influenced by ease of 
retrieval when the experience of fluency is given a spurious explanation by 
the presence of curved or straight text boxes, by the background color of 
the screen, or by other irrelevant factors that the experimenters dreamed 



up. 

As I have described it, the process that leads to judgment by availability 
appears to involve a complex chain of reasoning. The subjects have an 
experience of diminishing fluency as they produce instances. They 
evidently have expectations about the rate at which fluency decreases, and 
those expectations are wrong: the difficulty of coming up with new 
instances increases more rapidly than they expect. It is the unexpectedly 
low fluency that causes people who were asked for twelve instances to 
describe themselves as unassertive. When the surprise is eliminated, low 
fluency no longer influences the judgment. The process appears to consist 
of a sophisticatedriethe subj set of inferences. Is the automatic System 1 
capable of it? 

The answer is that in fact no complex reasoning is needed. Among the 
basic features of System 1 is its ability to set expectations and to be 
surprised when these expectations are violated. The system also retrieves 
possible causes of a surprise, usually by finding a possible cause among 
recent surprises. Furthermore, System 2 can reset the expectations of 
System 1 on the fly, so that an event that would normally be surprising is 
now almost normal. Suppose you are told that the three-year-old boy who 
lives next door frequently wears a top hat in his stroller. You will be far less 
surprised when you actually see him with his top hat than you would have 
been without the warning. In Schwarz’s experiment, the background music 
has been mentioned as a possible cause of retrieval problems. The 
difficulty of retrieving twelve instances is no longer a surprise and therefore 
is less likely to be evoked by the task of judging assertiveness. 

Schwarz and his colleagues discovered that people who are personally 
involved in the judgment are more likely to consider the number of 
instances they retrieve from memory and less likely to go by fluency. They 
recruited two groups of students for a study of risks to cardiac health. Half 
the students had a family history of cardiac disease and were expected to 
take the task more seriously than the others, who had no such history. All 
were asked to recall either three or eight behaviors in their routine that 
could affect their cardiac health (some were asked for risky behaviors, 
others for protective behaviors). Students with no family history of heart 
disease were casual about the task and followed the availability heuristic. 
Students who found it difficult to find eight instances of risky behavior felt 
themselves relatively safe, and those who struggled to retrieve examples of 
safe behaviors felt themselves at risk. The students with a family history of 
heart disease showed the opposite pattern—they felt safer when they 
retrieved many instances of safe behavior and felt greater danger when 
they retrieved many instances of risky behavior. They were also more likely 
to feel that their future behavior would be affected by the experience of 



evaluating their risk. 

The conclusion is that the ease with which instances come to mind is a 
System 1 heuristic, which is replaced by a focus on content when System 2 
is more engaged. Multiple lines of evidence converge on the conclusion 
that people who let themselves be guided by System 1 are more strongly 
susceptible to availability biases than others who are in a state of higher 
vigilance. The following are some conditions in which people “go with the 
flow” and are affected more strongly by ease of retrieval than by the content 
they retrieved: 


• when they are engaged in another effortful task at the same time 

• when they are in a good mood because they just thought of a happy 
episode in their life 

• if they score low on a depression scale 

• if they are knowledgeable novices on the topic of the task, in contrast 
to true experts 

• when they score high on a scale of faith in intuition 

• if they are (or are made to feel) powerful 


I find the last finding particularly intriguing. The authors introduce their 
article with a famous quote: “I don’t spend a lot of time taking polls around 
the world to tell me what I think is the right way to act. I’ve just got to know 
how I feel” (Georgee e the w W. Bush, November 2002). They go on to 
show that reliance on intuition is only in part a personality trait. Merely 
reminding people of a time when they had power increases their apparent 
trust in their own intuition. 

Speaking of Availability 


“Because of the coincidence of two planes crashing last month, 
she now prefers to take the train. That’s silly. The risk hasn’t really 
changed; it is an availability bias.” 


“He underestimates the risks of indoor pollution because there 
are few media stories on them. That’s an availability effect. He 
should look at the statistics.” 



“She has been watching too many spy movies recently, so she’s 
seeing conspiracies everywhere.” 


“The CEO has had several successes in a row, so failure doesn’t 
come easily to her mind. The availability bias is making her 
overconfident.” 



Availability, Emotion, and Risk 


Students of risk were quick to see that the idea of availability was relevant 
to their concerns. Even before our work was published, the economist 
Howard Kunreuther, who was then in the early stages of a career that he 
has devoted to the study of risk and insurance, noticed that availability 
effects help explain the pattern of insurance purchase and protective action 
after disasters. Victims and near victims are very concerned after a 
disaster. After each significant earthquake, Californians are for a while 
diligent in purchasing insurance and adopting measures of protection and 
mitigation. They tie down their boiler to reduce quake damage, seal their 
basement doors against floods, and maintain emergency supplies in good 
order. However, the memories of the disaster dim over time, and so do 
worry and diligence. The dynamics of memory help explain the recurrent 
cycles of disaster, concern, and growing complacency that are familiar to 
students of large-scale emergencies. 

Kunreuther also observed that protective actions, whether by individuals 
or governments, are usually designed to be adequate to the worst disaster 
actually experienced. As long ago as pharaonic Egypt, societies have 
tracked the high-water mark of rivers that periodically flood—and have 
always prepared accordingly, apparently assuming that floods will not rise 
higher than the existing high-water mark. Images of a worse disaster do 
not come easily to mind. 

Availability and Affect 

The most influential studies of availability biases were carried out by our 
friends in Eugene, where Paul Slovic and his longtime collaborator Sarah 
Lichtenstein were joined by our former student Baruch Fischhoff. They 
carried out groundbreaking research on public perceptions of risks, 
including a survey that has become the standard example of an availability 
bias. They asked participants in their survey to si Is th t#consider pairs of 
causes of death: diabetes and asthma, or stroke and accidents. For each 
pair, the subjects indicated the more frequent cause and estimated the 
ratio of the two frequencies. The judgments were compared to health 
statistics of the time. Here’s a sample of their findings: 


• Strokes cause almost twice as many deaths as all accidents 
combined, but 80% of respondents judged accidental death to be 



more likely. 

• Tornadoes were seen as more frequent killers than asthma, although 
the latter cause 20 times more deaths. 

• Death by lightning was judged less likely than death from botulism 
even though it is 52 times more frequent. 

• Death by disease is 18 times as likely as accidental death, but the 
two were judged about equally likely. 

• Death by accidents was judged to be more than 300 times more 
likely than death by diabetes, but the true ratio is 1:4. 


The lesson is clear: estimates of causes of death are warped by media 
coverage. The coverage is itself biased toward novelty and poignancy. The 
media do not just shape what the public is interested in, but also are 
shaped by it. Editors cannot ignore the public’s demands that certain 
topics and viewpoints receive extensive coverage. Unusual events (such 
as botulism) attract disproportionate attention and are consequently 
perceived as less unusual than they really are. The world in our heads is 
not a precise replica of reality; our expectations about the frequency of 
events are distorted by the prevalence and emotional intensity of the 
messages to which we are exposed. 

The estimates of causes of death are an almost direct representation of 
the activation of ideas in associative memory, and are a good example of 
substitution. But Slovic and his colleagues were led to a deeper insight: 
they saw that the ease with which ideas of various risks come to mind and 
the emotional reactions to these risks are inextricably linked. Frightening 
thoughts and images occur to us with particular ease, and thoughts of 
danger that are fluent and vivid exacerbate fear. 

As mentioned earlier, Slovic eventually developed the notion of an affect 
heuristic, in which people make judgments and decisions by consulting 
their emotions: Do I like it? Do I hate it? How strongly do I feel about it? In 
many domains of life, Slovic said, people form opinions and make choices 
that directly express their feelings and their basic tendency to approach or 
avoid, often without knowing that they are doing so. The affect heuristic is 
an instance of substitution, in which the answer to an easy question (How 
do I feel about it?) serves as an answer to a much harder question (What 
do I think about it?). Slovic and his colleagues related their views to the 
work of the neuroscientist Antonio Damasio, who had proposed that 
people’s emotional evaluations of outcomes, and the bodily states and the 
approach and avoidance tendencies associated with them, all play a 
central role in guiding decision making. Damasio and his colleagues have 
observed that people who do not display the appropriate emotions before 



they decide, sometimes because of brain damage, also have an impaired 
ability to make good decisions. An inability to be guided by a “healthy fear” 
of bad consequences is a disastrous flaw. 

In a compelling demonstration of the workings of the affect heuristic, 
Slovic’s research team surveyed opinions about various technologies, 
including water fluoridation, chemical plants, food preservatives, and cars, 
and asked their respondents to list both the benefits &gt; 

The best part of the experiment came next. After completing the initial 
survey, the respondents read brief passages with arguments in favor of 
various technologies. Some were given arguments that focused on the 
numerous benefits of a technology; others, arguments that stressed the low 
risks. These messages were effective in changing the emotional appeal of 
the technologies. The striking finding was that people who had received a 
message extolling the benefits of a technology also changed their beliefs 
about its risks. Although they had received no relevant evidence, the 
technology they now liked more than before was also perceived as less 
risky. Similarly, respondents who were told only that the risks of a 
technology were mild developed a more favorable view of its benefits. The 
implication is clear: as the psychologist Jonathan Haidt said in another 
context, “The emotional tail wags the rational dog.” The affect heuristic 
simplifies our lives by creating a world that is much tidier than reality. Good 
technologies have few costs in the imaginary world we inhabit, bad 
technologies have no benefits, and all decisions are easy. In the real world, 
of course, we often face painful tradeoffs between benefits and costs. 

The Public and the Experts 

Paul Slovic probably knows more about the peculiarities of human 
judgment of risk than any other individual. His work offers a picture of Mr. 
and Ms. Citizen that is far from flattering: guided by emotion rather than by 
reason, easily swayed by trivial details, and inadequately sensitive to 
differences between low and negligibly low probabilities. Slovic has also 
studied experts, who are clearly superior in dealing with numbers and 
amounts. Experts show many of the same biases as the rest of us in 
attenuated form, but often their judgments and preferences about risks 
diverge from those of other people. 

Differences between experts and the public are explained in part by 
biases in lay judgments, but Slovic draws attention to situations in which 
the differences reflect a genuine conflict of values. He points out that 
experts often measure risks by the number of lives (or life-years) lost, while 
the public draws finer distinctions, for example between “good deaths” and 



“bad deaths,” or between random accidental fatalities and deaths that 
occur in the course of voluntary activities such as skiing. These legitimate 
distinctions are often ignored in statistics that merely count cases. Slovic 
argues from such observations that the public has a richer conception of 
risks than the experts do. Consequently, he strongly resists the view that 
the experts should rule, and that their opinions should be accepted without 
question when they conflict with the opinions and wishes of other citizens. 
When experts and the public disagree on their priorities, he says, “Each 
side muiesst respect the insights and intelligence of the other.” 

In his desire to wrest sole control of risk policy from experts, Slovic has 
challenged the foundation of their expertise: the idea that risk is objective. 

“Risk” does not exist “out there,” independent of our minds and 
culture, waiting to be measured. Human beings have invented the 
concept of “risk” to help them understand and cope with the 
dangers and uncertainties of life. Although these dangers are 
real, there is no such thing as “real risk” or “objective risk.” 

To illustrate his claim, Slovic lists nine ways of defining the mortality risk 
associated with the release of a toxic material into the air, ranging from 
“death per million people” to “death per million dollars of product 
produced.” His point is that the evaluation of the risk depends on the 
choice of a measure—with the obvious possibility that the choice may 
have been guided by a preference for one outcome or another. He goes 
on to conclude that “defining risk is thus an exercise in power.” You might 
not have guessed that one can get to such thorny policy issues from 
experimental studies of the psychology of judgment! However, policy is 
ultimately about people, what they want and what is best for them. Every 
policy question involves assumptions about human nature, in particular 
about the choices that people may make and the consequences of their 
choices for themselves and for society. 

Another scholar and friend whom I greatly admire, Cass Sunstein, 
disagrees sharply with Slovic’s stance on the different views of experts and 
citizens, and defends the role of experts as a bulwark against “populist” 
excesses. Sunstein is one of the foremost legal scholars in the United 
States, and shares with other leaders of his profession the attribute of 
intellectual fearlessness. He knows he can master any body of knowledge 
quickly and thoroughly, and he has mastered many, including both the 
psychology of judgment and choice and issues of regulation and risk 
policy. His view is that the existing system of regulation in the United 
States displays a very poor setting of priorities, which reflects reaction to 
public pressures more than careful objective analysis. He starts from the 



position that risk regulation and government intervention to reduce risks 
should be guided by rational weighting of costs and benefits, and that the 
natural units for this analysis are the number of lives saved (or perhaps the 
number of life-years saved, which gives more weight to saving the young) 
and the dollar cost to the economy. Poor regulation is wasteful of lives and 
money, both of which can be measured objectively. Sunstein has not been 
persuaded by Slovic’s argument that risk and its measurement is 
subjective. Many aspects of risk assessment are debatable, but he has 
faith in the objectivity that may be achieved by science, expertise, and 
careful deliberation. 

Sunstein came to believe that biased reactions to risks are an important 
source of erratic and misplaced priorities in public policy. Lawmakers and 
regulators may be overly responsive to the irrational concerns of citizens, 
both because of political sensitivity and because they are prone to the 
same cognitive biases as other citizens. 

Sunstein and a collaborator, the jurist Timur Kuran, invented a name for 
the mechanism through which biases flow into policy: the availability 
cascade. They comment that in the social context, “all heuristics are equal, 
but availability is more equal than the others.” They have in mind an expand 
Lined notion of the heuristic, in which availability provides a heuristic for 
judgments other than frequency. In particular, the importance of an idea is 
often judged by the fluency (and emotional charge) with which that idea 
comes to mind. 

An availability cascade is a self-sustaining chain of events, which may 
start from media reports of a relatively minor event and lead up to public 
panic and large-scale government action. On some occasions, a media 
story about a risk catches the attention of a segment of the public, which 
becomes aroused and worried. This emotional reaction becomes a story 
in itself, prompting additional coverage in the media, which in turn 
produces greater concern and involvement. The cycle is sometimes sped 
along deliberately by “availability entrepreneurs,” individuals or 
organizations who work to ensure a continuous flow of worrying news. The 
danger is increasingly exaggerated as the media compete for attention- 
grabbing headlines. Scientists and others who try to dampen the 
increasing fear and revulsion attract little attention, most of it hostile: 
anyone who claims that the danger is overstated is suspected of 
association with a “heinous cover-up.” The issue becomes politically 
important because it is on everyone’s mind, and the response of the 
political system is guided by the intensity of public sentiment. The 
availability cascade has now reset priorities. Other risks, and other ways 
that resources could be applied for the public good, all have faded into the 



background. 

Kuran and Sunstein focused on two examples that are still controversial: 
the Love Canal affair and the so-called Alar scare. In Love Canal, buried 
toxic waste was exposed during a rainy season in 1979, causing 
contamination of the water well beyond standard limits, as well as a foul 
smell. The residents of the community were angry and frightened, and one 
of them, Lois Gibbs, was particularly active in an attempt to sustain interest 
in the problem. The availability cascade unfolded according to the 
standard script. At its peak there were daily stories about Love Canal, 
scientists attempting to claim that the dangers were overstated were 
ignored or shouted down, ABC News aired a program titled The Killing 
Ground, and empty baby-size coffins were paraded in front of the 
legislature. A large number of residents were relocated at government 
expense, and the control of toxic waste became the major environmental 
issue of the 1980s. The legislation that mandated the cleanup of toxic 
sites, called CERCLA, established a Superfund and is considered a 
significant achievement of environmental legislation. It was also expensive, 
and some have claimed that the same amount of money could have saved 
many more lives if it had been directed to other priorities. Opinions about 
what actually happened at Love Canal are still sharply divided, and claims 
of actual damage to health appear not to have been substantiated. Kuran 
and Sunstein wrote up the Love Canal story almost as a pseudo-event, 
while on the other side of the debate, environmentalists still speak of the 
“Love Canal disaster.” 

Opinions are also divided on the second example Kuran and Sunstein 
used to illustrate their concept of an availability cascade, the Alar incident, 
known to detractors of environmental concerns as the “Alar scare” of 1989. 
Alar is a chemical that was sprayed on apples to regulate their growth and 
improve their appearance. The scare began with press stories that the 
chemical, when consumed in gigantic doses, caused cancerous tumors in 
rats and mice. The stories understandably frightened the public, and those 
fears encouraged more media coverage, the basic mechanism of an 
availability cascade. The topic dominated the news and produced 
dramatic media events such as the testimony of the actress Meryl Streep 
before Congress. The apple industry su ofstained large losses as apples 
and apple products became objects of fear. Kuran and Sunstein quote a 
citizen who called in to ask “whether it was safer to pour apple juice down 
the drain or to take it to a toxic waste dump.” The manufacturer withdrew 
the product and the FDA banned it. Subsequent research confirmed that 
the substance might pose a very small risk as a possible carcinogen, but 
the Alar incident was certainly an enormous overreaction to a minor 



problem. The net effect of the incident on public health was probably 
detrimental because fewer good apples were consumed. 

The Alar tale illustrates a basic limitation in the ability of our mind to deal 
with small risks: we either ignore them altogether or give them far too much 
weight—nothing in between. Every parent who has stayed up waiting for a 
teenage daughter who is late from a party will recognize the feeling. You 
may know that there is really (almost) nothing to worry about, but you 
cannot help images of disaster from coming to mind. As Slovic has 
argued, the amount of concern is not adequately sensitive to the probability 
of harm; you are imagining the numerator—the tragic story you saw on the 
news—and not thinking about the denominator. Sunstein has coined the 
phrase “probability neglect” to describe the pattern. The combination of 
probability neglect with the social mechanisms of availability cascades 
inevitably leads to gross exaggeration of minor threats, sometimes with 
important consequences. 

In today’s world, terrorists are the most significant practitioners of the art 
of inducing availability cascades. With a few horrible exceptions such as 
9/11, the number of casualties from terror attacks is very small relative to 
other causes of death. Even in countries that have been targets of 
intensive terror campaigns, such as Israel, the weekly number of casualties 
almost never came close to the number of traffic deaths. The difference is 
in the availability of the two risks, the ease and the frequency with which 
they come to mind. Gruesome images, endlessly repeated in the media, 
cause everyone to be on edge. As I know from experience, it is difficult to 
reason oneself into a state of complete calm. Terrorism speaks directly to 
System 1. 

Where do I come down in the debate between my friends? Availability 
cascades are real and they undoubtedly distort priorities in the allocation 
of public resources. Cass Sunstein would seek mechanisms that insulate 
decision makers from public pressures, letting the allocation of resources 
be determined by impartial experts who have a broad view of all risks and 
of the resources available to reduce them. Paul Slovic trusts the experts 
much less and the public somewhat more than Sunstein does, and he 
points out that insulating the experts from the emotions of the public 
produces policies that the public will reject—an impossible situation in a 
democracy. Both are eminently sensible, and I agree with both. 

I share Sunstein’s discomfort with the influence of irrational fears and 
availability cascades on public policy in the domain of risk. However, I also 
share Slovic’s belief that widespread fears, even if they are unreasonable, 
should not be ignored by policy makers. Rational or not, fear is painful and 
debilitating, and policy makers must endeavor to protect the public from 
fear, not only from real dangers. 



Slovic rightly stresses the resistance of the public to the idea of 
decisions being made by unelected and unaccountable experts. 
Furthermore, availability cascades may have a long-term benefit by calling 
attention to classes of risks and by increasing the overall size of the risk- 
reduction budget. The Love Canal incident may have caused excessive 
resources to be allocated to the management of toxic betwaste, but it also 
had a more general effect in raising the priority level of environmental 
concerns. Democracy is inevitably messy, in part because the availability 
and affect heuristics that guide citizens’ beliefs and attitudes are inevitably 
biased, even if they generally point in the right direction. Psychology should 
inform the design of risk policies that combine the experts’ knowledge with 
the public’s emotions and intuitions. 

Speaking of Availability Cascades 


“She’s raving about an innovation that has large benefits and no 
costs. I suspect the affect heuristic.” 


“This is an availability cascade: a nonevent that is inflated by the 
media and the public until it fills our TV screens and becomes all 
anyone is talking about.” 



Tom W’s Specialty 


Have a look at a simple puzzle: 

Tom W is a graduate student at the main university in your state. 
Please rank the following nine fields of graduate specialization in 
order of the likelihood that Tom W is now a student in each of 
these fields. Use 1 for the most likely, 9 for the least likely. 


business administration 
computer science 
engineering 

humanities and education 
law 

medicine 
library science 
physical and life sciences 
social science and social work 

This question is easy, and you knew immediately that the relative size of 
enrollment in the different fields is the key to a solution. So far as you know, 
Tom W was picked at random from the graduate students at the university, 
like a single marble drawn from an urn. To decide whether a marble is 
more likely to be red or green, you need to know how many marbles of 
each color there are in the urn. The proportion of marbles of a particular 
kind is called a base rate. Similarly, the base rate of humanities and 
education in this problem is the proportion of students of that field among 
all the graduate students. In the absence of specific information about Tom 
W, you will go by the base rates and guess that he is more likely to be 
enrolled in humanities and education than in computer science or library 
science, because there are more students overall in the humanities and 
education than in the other two fields. Using base-rate information is the 
obvious move when no other information is provided. 


Next comes a task that has nothing to do with base rates. 

The following is a personality sketch of Tom W written during 
Tom’s senior year in high school by a psychologist, on the basis 
of psychological tests of uncertain validity: 



Tom W is of high intelligence, although lacking in true creativity. 
He has a need for order and clarity, and for neat and tidy systems 
in which every detail finds its appropriate place. His writing is 
rather dull and mechanical, occasionally enlivened by somewhat 
corny puns and flashes of imagination of the sci-fi type. He has a 
strong drive for competence. He seems to have little feel and little 
sympathy for other people, and does not enjoy interacting with 
others. Self-centered, he nonetheless has a deep moral sense. 


Now please take a sheet of paper and rank the nine fields of 
specialization listed below by how similar the description of Tom 
W is to the typical graduate student in each of the following fields. 
Use 1 for the most likely and 9 for the least likely. 

\bu will get more out of the chapter if you give the task a quick try; 
reading the report on Tom W is necessary to make your judgments about 
the various graduate specialties. 

This question too is straightforward. It requires you to retrieve, or 
perhaps to construct, a stereotype of graduate students in the different 
fields. When the experiment was first conducted, in the early 1970s, the 
average ordering was as follows. Yours is probably not very different: 


1. computer science 

2. engineering 

3. business administration 

4. physical and life sciences 

5. library science 

6. law 

7. medicine 

8. humanities and education 

9. social science and social work 


You probably ranked computer science among the best fitting because of 
hints of nerdiness (“corny puns”). In fact, the description of Tom W was 
written to fit that stereotype. Another specialty that most people ranked 
high is engineering (“neat and tidy systems”). You probably thought that 
Tom W is not a good fit with your idea of social science and social work 



(“little feel and little sympathy for other people”). Professional stereotypes 
appear to have changed little in the nearly forty years since I designed the 
description of Tom W. 

The task of ranking the nine careers is complex and certainly requires 
the discipline and sequential organization of which only System 2 is 
capable. However, the hints planted in the description (corny puns and 
others) were intended to activate an association with a stereotype, an 
automatic activity of System 1. 

The instructions for this similarity task required a comparison of the 
description of Tom W to the stereotypes of the various fields of 
specialization. For the purposes of tv&gt; 

If you examine Tom W again, you will see that he is a good fit to 
stereotypes of some small groups of students (computer scientists, 
librarians, engineers) and a much poorer fit to the largest groups 
(humanities and education, social science and social work). Indeed, the 
participants almost always ranked the two largest fields very low. Tom W 
was intentionally designed as an “anti-base-rate” character, a good fit to 
small fields and a poor fit to the most populated specialties. 

Predicting by Representativeness 

The third task in the sequence was administered to graduate students in 
psychology, and it is the critical one: rank the fields of specialization in 
order of the likelihood that Tom W is now a graduate student in each of 
these fields. The members of this prediction group knew the relevant 
statistical facts: they were familiar with the base rates of the different fields, 
and they knew that the source of Tom W’s description was not highly 
trustworthy. However, we expected them to focus exclusively on the 
similarity of the description to the stereotypes—we called it 
representativeness —ignoring both the base rates and the doubts about 
the veracity of the description. They would then rank the small specialty— 
computer science—as highly probable, because that outcome gets the 
highest representativeness score. 

Amos and I worked hard during the year we spent in Eugene, and I 
sometimes stayed in the office through the night. One of my tasks for such 
a night was to make up a description that would pit representativeness and 
base rates against each other. Tom W was the result of my efforts, and I 
completed the description in the early morning hours. The first person who 
showed up to work that morning was our colleague and friend Robyn 
Dawes, who was both a sophisticated statistician and a skeptic about the 
validity of intuitive judgment. If anyone would see the relevance of the base 



rate, it would have to be Robyn. I called Robyn over, gave him the question 
I had just typed, and asked him to guess Tom W’s profession. I still 
remember his sly smile as he said tentatively, “computer scientist?” That 
was a happy moment—even the mighty had fallen. Of course, Robyn 
immediately recognized his mistake as soon as I mentioned “base rate,” 
but he had not spontaneously thought of it. Although he knew as much as 
anyone about the role of base rates in prediction, he neglected them when 
presented with the description of an individual’s personality. As expected, 
he substituted a judgment of representativeness for the probability he was 
asked to assess. 

Amos and I then collected answers to the same question from 114 
graduate students in psychology at three major universities, all of whom 
had taken several courses in statistics. They did not disappoint us. Their 
rankings of the nine fields by probability did not differ from ratings by 
similarity to the stereotype. Substitution was perfect in this case: there was 
no indication that the participants did anything else but judge 
representativeness. The question about probability (likelihood) was 
difficult, but the question about similarity was easier, and it was answered 
instead. This is a serious mistake, because judgments of similarity and 
probak tbility are not constrained by the same logical rules. It is entirely 
acceptable for judgments of similarity to be unaffected by base rates and 
also by the possibility that the description was inaccurate, but anyone who 
ignores base rates and the quality of evidence in probability assessments 
will certainly make mistakes. 

The concept “the probability that Tom W studies computer science” is 
not a simple one. Logicians and statisticians disagree about its meaning, 
and some would say it has no meaning at all. For many experts it is a 
measure of subjective degree of belief. There are some events you are 
sure of, for example, that the sun rose this morning, and others you 
consider impossible, such as the Pacific Ocean freezing all at once. Then 
there are many events, such as your next-door neighbor being a computer 
scientist, to which you assign an intermediate degree of belief—which is 
your probability of that event. 

Logicians and statisticians have
 developed competing definitions of 
probability, all very precise. For laypeople, however, probability (a 
synonym of likelihood in everyday language) is a vague notion, related to 
uncertainty, propensity, plausibility, and surprise. The vagueness is not 
particular to this concept, nor is it especially troublesome. We know, more 
or less, what we mean when we use a word such as democracy or beauty 
and the people we are talking to understand, more or less, what we 
intended to say. In all the years I spent asking questions about the 



probability of events, no one ever raised a hand to ask me, “Sir, what do 
you mean by probability?” as they would have done if I had asked them to 
assess a strange concept such as globability. Everyone acted as if they 
knew how to answer my questions, although we all understood that it would 
be unfair to ask them for an explanation of what the word means. 

People who are asked to assess probability are not stumped, because 
they do not try to judge probability as statisticians and philosophers use 
the word. A question about probability or likelihood activates a mental 
shotgun, evoking answers to easier questions. One of the easy answers is 
an automatic assessment of representativeness—routine in understanding 
language. The (false) statement that “Elvis Presley’s parents wanted him to 
be a dentist” is mildly funny because the discrepancy between the images 
of Presley and a dentist is detected automatically. System 1 generates an 
impression of similarity without intending to do so. The representativeness 
heuristic is involved when someone says “She will win the election; you can 
see she is a winner” or “He won’t go far as an academic; too many 
tattoos.” We rely on representativeness when we judge the potential 
leadership of a candidate for office by the shape of his chin or the 
forcefulness of his speeches. 

Although it is common, prediction by representativeness is not 
statistically optimal. Michael Lewis’s bestselling Moneyball is a story 
about the inefficiency of this mode of prediction. Professional baseball 
scouts traditionally forecast the success of possible players in part by their 
build and look. The hero of Lewis’s book is Billy Beane, the manager of the 
Oakland A’s, who made the unpopular decision to overrule his scouts and 
to select players by the statistics of past performance. The players the A’s 
picked were inexpensive, because other teams had rejected them for not 
looking the part. The team soon achieved excellent results at low cost. 

The Sins of Representativeness 

Judging probability byals representativeness has important virtues: the 
intuitive impressions that it produces are often—indeed, usually—more 
accurate than chance guesses would be. 


• On most occasions, people who act friendly are in fact friendly. 

• A professional athlete who is very tall and thin is much more likely to 
play basketball than football. 

• People with a PhD are more likely to subscribe to The New York 
Times than people who ended their education after high school. 



Young men are more likely than elderly women to drive aggressively. 


In all these cases and in many others, there is some truth to the 
stereotypes that govern judgments of representativeness, and predictions 
that follow this heuristic may be accurate. In other situations, the 
stereotypes are false and the representativeness heuristic will mislead, 
especially if it causes people to neglect base-rate information that points in 
another direction. Even when the heuristic has some validity, exclusive 
reliance on it is associated with grave sins against statistical logic. 

One sin of representativeness is an excessive willingness to predict the 
occurrence of unlikely (low base-rate) events. Here is an example: you see 
a person reading The New York Times on the New York subway. Which of 
the following is a better bet about the reading stranger? 

She has a PhD. 

She does not have a college degree. 

Representativeness would tell you to bet on the PhD, but this is not 
necessarily wise. You should seriously consider the second alternative, 
because many more nongraduates than PhDs ride in New York subways. 
And if you must guess whether a woman who is described as “a shy poetry 
lover” studies Chinese literature or business administration, you should opt 
for the latter option. Even if every female student of Chinese literature is 
shy and loves poetry, it is almost certain that there are more bashful poetry 
lovers in the much larger population of business students. 

People without training in statistics are quite capable of using base 
rates in predictions under some conditions. In the first version of the Tom 
W problem, which provides no details about him, it is obvious to everyone 
that the probability of Tom W’s being in a particular field is simply the base 
rate frequency of enrollment in that field. However, concern for base rates 
evidently disappears as soon as Tom W’s personality is described. 

Amos and I originally believed, on the basis of our early evidence, that 
base-rate information will always be neglected when information about the 
specific instance is available, but that conclusion was too strong. 
Psychologists have conducted many experiments in which base-rate 
information is explicitly provided as part of the problem, and many of the 
participants are influenced by those base rates, although the information 
about the individual case is almost always weighted more than mere 
statistics. Norbert Schwarz and his colleagues showed that instructing 
people to “think like a statistician” enhanced the use of base-rate 
information, while the instruction to “think like a clinician” had the opposite 



effect. 

An experiment that was conducted a few years ago with Harvard 
undergradut oates yielded a finding that surprised me: enhanced activation 
of System 2 caused a significant improvement of predictive accuracy in 
the Tom W problem. The experiment combined the old problem with a 
modern variation of cognitive fluency. Half the students were told to puff out 
their cheeks during the task, while the others were told to frown. Frowning, 
as we have seen, generally increases the vigilance of System 2 and 
reduces both overconfidence and the reliance on intuition. The students 
who puffed out their cheeks (an emotionally neutral expression) replicated 
the original results: they relied exclusively on representativeness and 
ignored the base rates. As the authors had predicted, however, the 
frowners did show some sensitivity to the base rates. This is an instructive 
finding. 


When an incorrect intuitive judgment is made, System 1 and System 2 
should both be indicted. System 1 suggested the incorrect intuition, and 
System 2 endorsed it and expressed it in a judgment. However, there are 
two possible reasons for the failure of System 2—ignorance or laziness. 
Some people ignore base rates because they believe them to be 
irrelevant in the presence of individual information. Others make the same 
mistake because they are not focused on the task. If frowning makes a 
difference, laziness seems to be the proper explanation of base-rate 
neglect, at least among Harvard undergrads. Their System 2 “knows” that 
base rates are relevant even when they are not explicitly mentioned, but 
applies that knowledge only when it invests special effort in the task. 

The second sin of representativeness is insensitivity to the quality of 
evidence. Recall the rule of System 1: WYSIATI. In the Tom W example, 
what activates your associative machinery is a description of Tom, which 
may or may not be an accurate portrayal. The statement that Tom W “has 
little feel and little sympathy for people” was probably enough to convince 
you (and most other readers) that he is very unlikely to be a student of 
social science or social work. But you were explicitly told that the 
description should not be trusted! 

\bu surely understand in principle that worthless information should not 
be treated differently from a complete lack of information, but WY SIATI 
makes it very difficult to apply that principle. Unless you decide 
immediately to reject evidence (for example, by determining that you 
received it from a liar), your System 1 will automatically process the 
information available as if it were true. There is one thing you can do when 
you have doubts about the quality of the evidence: let your judgments of 



probability stay close to the base rate. Don’t expect this exercise of 
discipline to be easy—it requires a significant effort of self-monitoring and 
self-control. 

The correct answer to the Tom W puzzle is that you should stay very 
close to your prior beliefs, slightly reducing the initially high probabilities of 
well-populated fields (humanities and education; social science and social 
work) and slightly raising the low probabilities of rare specialties (library 
science, computer science). \t&gt;u are not exactly where you would be if you 
had known nothing at all about Tom W, but the little evidence you have is 
not trustworthy, so the base rates should dominate your estimates. 

Howto Discipline Intuition 

Your probability that it will rain tomorrow is your subjective degree of belief, 
but you should not let yourself believe whatever comes to your mind. To be 
useful, your beliefs should be constrained by the logic of probability. So if 
you believe that there is a 40% chance plethat it will rain sometime 
tomorrow, you must also believe that there is a 60% chance it will not rain 
tomorrow, and you must not believe that there is a 50% chance that it will 
rain tomorrow morning. And if you believe that there is a 30% chance that 
candidate X will be elected president, and an 80% chance that he will be 
reelected if he wins the first time, then you must believe that the chances 
that he will be elected twice in a row are 24%. 

The relevant “rules” for cases such as the Tom W problem are provided 
by Bayesian statistics. This influential modern approach to statistics is 
named after an English minister of the eighteenth century, the Reverend 
Thomas Bayes, who is credited with the first major contribution to a large 
problem: the logic of how people should change their mind in the light of 
evidence. Bayes’s rule specifies how prior beliefs (in the examples of this 
chapter, base rates) should be combined with the diagnosticity of the 
evidence, the degree to which it favors the hypothesis over the alternative. 
For example, if you believe that 3% of graduate students are enrolled in 
computer science (the base rate), and you also believe that the description 
of Tom W is 4 times more likely for a graduate student in that field than in 
other fields, then Bayes’s rule says you must believe that the probability 
that Tom W is a computer scientist is now 11 %. If the base rate had been 
80%, the new degree of belief would be 94.1 %. And so on. 

The mathematical details are not relevant in this book. There are two 
ideas to keep in mind about Bayesian reasoning and how we tend to mess 
it up. The first is that base rates matter, even in the presence of evidence 
about the case at hand. This is often not intuitively obvious. The second is 



that intuitive impressions of the diagnosticity of evidence are often 
exaggerated. The combination of WY SIATI and associative coherence 
tends to make us believe in the stories we spin for ourselves. The essential 
keys to disciplined Bayesian reasoning can be simply summarized: 


• Anchor your judgment of the probability of an outcome on a plausible 
base rate. 

• Question the diagnosticity of your evidence. 


Both ideas are straightforward. It came as a shock to me when I realized 
that I was never taught how to implement them, and that even now I find it 
unnatural to do so. 

Speaking of Representativeness 


“The lawn is well trimmed, the receptionist looks competent, and 
the furniture is attractive, but this doesn’t mean it is a well- 
managed company. I hope the board does not go by 
representativeness.” 


“This start-up looks as if it could not fail, but the base rate of 
success in the industry is extremely low. How do we know this 
case is different?” 


“They keep making the same mistake: predicting rare events 
from weak evidence. When the evidence is weak, one should 
stick with the base rates.” 


“I know this report is absolutely damning, and it may be based on 
solid evidence, but how sure are we? We must allow for that 
uncertainty in our thinking.” 

ht="5%"&gt; 



Linda: Less Is More 


The best-known and most controversial of our experiments involved a 
fictitious lady called Linda. Amos and I made up the Linda problem to 
provide conclusive evidence of the role of heuristics in judgment and of 
their incompatibility with logic. This is how we described Linda: 

Linda is thirty-one years old, single, outspoken, and very bright. 

She majored in philosophy. As a student, she was deeply 

concerned with issues of discrimination and social justice, and 

also participated in antinuclear demonstrations. 

The audiences who heard this description in the 1980s always laughed 
because they immediately knew that Linda had attended the University of 
California at Berkeley, which was famous at the time for its radical, 
politically engaged students. In one of our experiments we presented 
participants with a list of eight possible scenarios for Linda. As in the Tom 
W problem, some ranked the scenarios by representativeness, others by 
probability. The Linda problem is similar, but with a twist. 

Linda is a teacher in elementary school. 

Linda works in a bookstore and takes yoga classes. 

Linda is active in the feminist movement. 

Linda is a psychiatric social worker. 

Linda is a member of the League of Women Voters. 

Linda is a bank teller. 

Linda is an insurance salesperson. 

Linda is a bank teller and is active in the feminist movement. 

The problem shows its age in several ways. The League of Women Voters 
is no longer as prominent as it was, and the idea of a feminist “movement” 
sounds quaint, a testimonial to the change in the status of women over the 
last thirty years. Even in the Facebook era, however, it is still easy to guess 
the almost perfect consensus of judgments: Linda is a very good fit for an 
active feminist, a fairly good fit for someone who works in a bookstore and 
takes yoga classes—and a very poor fit for a bank teller or an insurance 
salesperson. 

Now focus on the critical items in the list: Does Linda look more like a 
bank teller, or more like a bank teller who is active in the feminist 
movement? Everyone agrees that Linda fits the idea of a “feminist bank 
teller” better than she fits the stereotype of bank tellers. The stereotypical 
bank teller is not a feminist activist, and adding that detail to the 



description makes for a more coherent story. 

The twist comes in the judgments of likelihood, because there is a 
logical relation between the two scenarios. Think in terms of Venn 
diagrams. The set of feminist bank tellers is wholly included in the set of 
bank tellers, as every feminist bank teller isO%"ustwora banO%" w a bank 
teller. Therefore the probability that Linda is a feminist bank teller must be 
lower than the probability of her being a bank teller. When you specify a 
possible event in greater detail you can only lower its probability. The 
problem therefore sets up a conflict between the intuition of 
representativeness and the logic of probability. 

Our initial experiment was between-subjects. Each participant saw a set 
of seven outcomes that included only one of the critical items (“bank teller” 
or “feminist bank teller”). Some ranked the outcomes by resemblance, 
others by likelihood. As in the case of Tom W, the average rankings by 
resemblance and by likelihood were identical; “feminist bank teller” ranked 
higher than “bank teller” in both. 

Then we took the experiment further, using a within-subject design. We 
made up the questionnaire as you saw it, with “bank teller” in the sixth 
position in the list and “feminist bank teller” as the last item. We were 
convinced that subjects would notice the relation between the two 
outcomes, and that their rankings would be consistent with logic. Indeed, 
we were so certain of this that we did not think it worthwhile to conduct a 
special experiment. My assistant was running another experiment in the 
lab, and she asked the subjects to complete the new Linda questionnaire 
while signing out, just before they got paid. 

About ten questionnaires had accumulated in a tray on my assistant’s 
desk before I casually glanced at them and found that all the subjects had 
ranked “feminist bank teller” as more probable than “bank teller.” I was so 
surprised that I still retain a “flashbulb memory” of the gray color of the 
metal desk and of where everyone was when I made that discovery. I 
quickly called Amos in great excitement to tell him what we had found: we 
had pitted logic against representativeness, and representativeness had 
won! 

In the language of this book, we had observed a failure of System 2: our 
participants had a fair opportunity to detect the relevance of the logical 
rule, since both outcomes were included in the same ranking. They did not 
take advantage of that opportunity. When we extended the experiment, we 
found that 89% of the undergraduates in our sample violated the logic of 
probability. We were convinced that statistically sophisticated respondents 
would do better, so we administered the same questionnaire to doctoral 
students in the decision-science program of the Stanford Graduate School 



of Business, all of whom had taken several advanced courses in 
probability, statistics, and decision theory. We were surprised again: 85% 
of these respondents also ranked “feminist bank teller” as more likely than 
“bank teller.” 

In what we later described as “increasingly desperate” attempts to 
eliminate the error, we introduced large groups of people to Linda and 
asked them this simple question: 

Which alternative is more probable? 

Linda is a bank teller. 

Linda is a bank teller and is active in the feminist movement. 

This stark version of the problem made Linda famous in some circles, and 
it earned us years of controversy. About 85% to 90% of undergraduates at 
several major universities chose the second option, contrary to logic. 
Remarkably, the sinners seemed to have no shame. When I asked my 
large undergraduatnite class in some indignation, “Do you realize that you 
have violated an elementary logical rule?” someone in the back row 
shouted, “So what?” and a graduate student who made the same error 
explained herself by saying, “I thought you just asked for my opinion.” 

The word fallacy is used, in general, when people fail to apply a logical 
rule that is obviously relevant. Amos and I introduced the idea of a 
conjunction fallacy, which people commit when they judge a conjunction of 
two events (here, bank teller and feminist) to be more probable than one of 
the events (bank teller) in a direct comparison. 

As in the Miiller-Lyer illusion, the fallacy remains attractive even when 
you recognize it for what it is. The naturalist Stephen Jay Gould described 
his own struggle with the Linda problem. He knew the correct answer, of 
course, and yet, he wrote, “a little homunculus in my head continues to jump 
up and down, shouting at me—‘but she can’t just be a bank teller; read the 
description.’” The little homunculus is of course Gould’s System 1 
speaking to him in insistent tones. (The two-system terminology had not yet 
been introduced when he wrote.) 

The correct answer to the short version of the Linda problem was the 
majority response in only one of our studies: 64% of a group of graduate 
students in the social sciences at Stanford and at Berkeley correctly 
judged “feminist bank teller” to be less probable than “bank teller.” In the 
original version with eight outcomes (shown above), only 15% of a similar 
group of graduate students had made that choice. The difference is 
instructive. The longer version separated the two critical outcomes by an 
intervening item (insurance salesperson), and the readers judged each 
outcome independently, without comparing them. The shorter version, in 



contrast, required an explicit comparison that mobilized System 2 and 
allowed most of the statistically sophisticated students to avoid the fallacy. 
Unfortunately, we did not explore the reasoning of the substantial minority 
(36%) of this knowledgeable group who chose incorrectly. 

The judgments of probability that our respondents offered, in both the 
Tom W and Linda problems, corresponded precisely to judgments of 
representativeness (similarity to stereotypes). Representativeness 
belongs to a cluster of closely related basic assessments that are likely to 
be generated together. The most representative outcomes combine with 
the personality description to produce the most coherent stories. The most 
coherent stories are not necessarily the most probable, but they are 
plausible, and the notions of coherence, plausibility, and probability are 
easily confused by the unwary. 

The uncritical substitution of plausibility for probability has pernicious 
effects on judgments when scenarios are used as tools of forecasting. 
Consider these two scenarios, which were presented to different groups, 
with a request to evaluate their probability: 

A massive flood somewhere in North America next year, in which 
more than 1,000 people drown 


An earthquake in California sometime next year, causing a flood 
in which more than 1,000 people drown 

The California earthquake scenario is more plausible than the North 
America scenario, although its probability is certainly smaller. As 
expected, probability judgments were higher for the richer and more 
entdetailed scenario, contrary to logic. This is a trap for forecasters and 
their clients: adding detail to scenarios makes them more persuasive, but 
less likely to come true. 

To appreciate the role of plausibility, consider the following questions: 

Which alternative is more probable? 

Mark has hair. 

Mark has blond hair. 


and 


Which alternative is more probable? 
Jane is a teacher. 

Jane is a teacher and walks to work. 



The two questions have the same logical structure as the Linda problem, 
but they cause no fallacy, because the more detailed outcome is only more 
detailed—it is not more plausible, or more coherent, or a better story. The 
evaluation of plausibility and coherence does not suggest and answer to 
the probability question. In the absence of a competing intuition, logic 
prevails. 

Less Is More, Sometimes Even In Joint Evaluation 

Christopher Hsee, of the University of Chicago, asked people to price sets 
of dinnerware offered in a clearance sale in a local store, where 
dinnerware regularly runs between $30 and $60. There were three groups 
in his experiment. The display below was shown to one group; Hsee labels 
that joint evaluation, because it allows a comparison of the two sets. The 
other two groups were shown only one of the two sets; this is single 
evaluation. Joint evaluation is a within-subject experiment, and single 
evaluation is between-subjects. 

Set A: 40 pieces Set B: 24 pieces 
Dinner plates 8, all in good condition 8, all in good condition 
Soup/salad bowls 8, all in good condition 8, all in good condition 
Dessert plates 8, all in good condition 8, all in good condition 
Cups 8, 2 of them broken 

Saucers 8, 7 of them broken 

Assuming that the dishes in the two sets are of equal quality, which is 
worth more? This question is easy. You can see that Set A contains all the 
dishes of Set B, and seven additional intact dishes, and it must be valued 
more. Indeed, the participants in Hsee’s joint evaluation experiment were 
willing to pay a little more for Set A than for Set B: $32 versus $30. 

The results reversed in single evaluation, where Set B was priced much 
higher than Set A: $33 versus $23. We know why this happened. Sets 
(including dinnerware sets!) are represented by norms and prototypes. You 
can sense immediately that the average value of the dishes is much lower 
for Set A than for Set B, because no one wants to pay for broken dishes. If 
the average dominates the evaluation, it is not surprising that Set B is 
valued more. Hsee called the resulting pattern less is more. By removing 
16 items from Set A (7 of them intact), its value is improved. 

Hsee’s finding was replicated by the experimental economist John List 



in a real market for baseball cards. He auctioned sets of ten high-value 
cards, and identical sets to which three cards of modest value were 
added. As in the dinnerware experiment, the larger sets were valued more 
than the smaller ones in joint evaluation, but less in single evaluation. From 
the perspective of economic theory, this result is troubling: the economic 
value of a dinnerware set or of a collection of baseball cards is a sum-like 
variable. Adding a positively valued item to the set can only increase its 
value. 

The Linda problem and the dinnerware problem have exactly the same 
structure. Probability, like economic value, is a sum-like variable, as 
illustrated by this example: 

probability (Linda is a teller) = probability (Linda is feminist teller) 
+ probability (Linda is non-feminist teller) 

This is also why, as in Hsee’s dinnerware study, single evaluations of the 
Linda problem produce a less-is-more pattern. System 1 averages instead 
of adding, so when the non-feminist bank tellers are removed from the set, 
subjective probability increases. However, the sum-like nature of the 
variable is less obvious for probability than for money. As a result, joint 
evaluation eliminates the error only in Hsee’s experiment, not in the Linda 
experiment. 

Linda was not the only conjunction error that survived joint evaluation. 
We found similar violations of logic in many other judgments. Participants 
in one of these studies were asked to rank four possible outcomes of the 
next Wimbledon tournament from most to least probable. Bjorn Borg was 
the dominant tennis player of the day when the study was conducted. 
These were the outcomes: 

A. Borg will win the match. 

B. Borg will lose the first set. 

C. Borg will lose the first set but win the match. 

D. Borg will win the first set but lose the match. 

The critical items are B and C. B is the more inclusive event and its 
probability must be higher than that of an event it includes. Contrary to 
logic, but not to representativeness or plausibility, 72% assigned B a lower 
probability than C—another instance of less is more in a direct 
comparison. Here si again, the scenario that was judged more probable 
was unquestionably more plausible, a more coherent fit with all that was 
known about the best tennis player in the world. 

To head off the possible objection that the conjunction fallacy is due to a 



misinterpretation of probability, we constructed a problem that required 
probability judgments, but in which the events were not described in words, 
and the term probability did not appear at all. We told participants about a 
regular six-sided die with four green faces and two red faces, which would 
be rolled 20 times. They were shown three sequences of greens (G) and 
reds (R), and were asked to choose one. They would (hypothetically) win 
$25 if their chosen sequence showed up. The sequences were: 


1. RGRRR 

2. GRGRRR 

3. GRRRRR 


Because the die has twice as many green as red faces, the first sequence 
is quite unrepresentative—like Linda being a bank teller. The second 
sequence, which contains six tosses, is a better fit to what we would 
expect from this die, because it includes two G’s. However, this sequence 
was constructed by adding a G to the beginning of the first sequence, so it 
can only be less likely than the first. This is the nonverbal equivalent to 
Linda being a feminist bank teller. As in the Linda study, 
representativeness dominated. Almost two-thirds of respondents preferred 
to bet on sequence 2 rather than on sequence 1. When presented with 
arguments for the two choices, however, a large majority found the correct 
argument (favoring sequence 1) more convincing. 

The next problem was a breakthrough, because we finally found a 
condition in which the incidence of the conjunction fallacy was much 
reduced. Two groups of subjects saw slightly different variants of the same 
problem: 



A health survey was conducted in a 
sample of adult males in British 
Columbia, of all ages and 
occupations. Please give your best 
estimate of the following values: 

What percentage of the men surveyed 
have had one or more heart attacks? 

What percentage of the men surveyed 
are both over 55 years old and have 
had one or more heart attacks? 


A health survey was conducted in a 
sample of 100 adult males in 
British Columbia, of all ages and 
occupations. Please give your best 
estimate of the following values: 

How many of the 100 participants 
have had one or more heart attacks? 

How many of the 100 participants 
both are over 55 years old and have 
had one or more heart attacks? 


The incidence of errors was 65% in the group that saw the problem on the 
left, and only 25% in the group that saw the problem on the right. 

Why is the question “How many of the 100 participants...” so much 
easier than “What percentage...”? A likely explanation is that the reference 
to 100 individuals brings a spatial representation to mind. Imagine that a 
large number of people are instructed to sort themselves into groups in a 
room: “Those whose names begin with the letters A to L are told to gather 
in the front left corner.” They are then instructed to sort themselves further. 
The relation of inclusion is now obvious, and you can see that individuals 
whose name begins with C will be a subset of the crowd in the front left 
corner. In the medical survey question, heart attack victims end up in a 
corner of the room, and some of them are less than 55 years old. Not 
everyone will share this particular vivid imagery, but many subsequent 
experiments have shown that the frequency representation, as it is known, 
makes it easy to appreciate that one group is wholly included in the other. 
The solution to the puzzle appears to be that a question phrased as “how 
many?” makes you think of individuals, but the same question phrased as 
“what percentage?” does not. 

What have we learned from these studies about the workings of System 
2? One conclusion, which is not new, is that System 2 is not impressively 
alert. The undergraduates and graduate students who participated in our 
thastudies of the conjunction fallacy certainly “knew” the logic of Venn 
diagrams, but they did not apply it reliably even when all the relevant 
information was laid out in front of them. The absurdity of the less-is-more 
pattern was obvious in Hsee’s dinnerware study and was easily 
recognized in the “how many?” representation, but it was not apparent to 




the thousands of people who have committed the conjunction fallacy in the 
original Linda problem and in others like it. In all these cases, the 
conjunction appeared plausible, and that sufficed for an endorsement of 
System 2. 

The laziness of System 2 is part of the story. If their next vacation had 
depended on it, and if they had been given indefinite time and told to follow 
logic and not to answer until they were sure of their answer, I believe that 
most of our subjects would have avoided the conjunction fallacy. However, 
their vacation did not depend on a correct answer; they spent very little 
time on it, and were content to answer as if they had only been “asked for 
their opinion.” The laziness of System 2 is an important fact of life, and the 
observation that representativeness can block the application of an 
obvious logical rule is also of some interest. 

The remarkable aspect of the Linda story is the contrast to the broken- 
dishes study. The two problems have the same structure, but yield different 
results. People who see the dinnerware set that includes broken dishes put 
a very low price on it; their behavior reflects a rule of intuition. Others who 
see both sets at once apply the logical rule that more dishes can only add 
value. Intuition governs judgments in the between-subjects condition; logic 
rules in joint evaluation. In the Linda problem, in contrast, intuition often 
overcame logic even in joint evaluation, although we identified some 
conditions in which logic prevails. 

Amos and I believed that the blatant violations of the logic of probability 
that we had observed in transparent problems were interesting and worth 
reporting to our colleagues. We also believed that the results strengthened 
our argument about the power of judgment heuristics, and that they would 
persuade doubters. And in this we were quite wrong. Instead, the Linda 
problem became a case study in the norms of controversy. 

The Linda problem attracted a great deal of attention, but it also became 
a magnet for critics of our approach to judgment. As we had already done, 
researchers found combinations of instructions and hints that reduced the 
incidence of the fallacy; some argued that, in the context of the Linda 
problem, it is reasonable for subjects to understand the word “probability” 
as if it means “plausibility.” These arguments were sometimes extended to 
suggest that our entire enterprise was misguided: if one salient cognitive 
illusion could be weakened or explained away, others could be as well. 
This reasoning neglects the unique feature of the conjunction fallacy as a 
case of conflict between intuition and logic. The evidence that we had built 
up for heuristics from between-subjects experiment (including studies of 
Linda) was not challenged—it was simply not addressed, and its salience 
was diminished by the exclusive focus on the conjunction fallacy. The net 
effect of the Linda problem was an increase in the visibility of our work to 



the general public, and a small dent in the credibility of our approach 
among scholars in the field. This was not at all what we had expected. 

If you visit a courtroom you will observe that lawyers apply two styles of 
criticism: to demolish a case they raise doubts about the strongest 
arguments that favor it; to discredit a witness, they focus on the weakest 
part of the testimony. The focus on weaknesses is also normal in 
politicaverl debates. I do not believe it is appropriate in scientific 
controversies, but I have come to accept as a fact of life that the norms of 
debate in the social sciences do not prohibit the political style of argument, 
especially when large issues are at stake—and the prevalence of bias in 
human judgment is a large issue. 

Some years ago I had a friendly conversation with Ralph Hertwig, a 
persistent critic of the Linda problem, with whom I had collaborated in a 
vain attempt to settle our differences. I asked him why he and others had 
chosen to focus exclusively on the conjunction fallacy, rather than on other 
findings that provided stronger support for our position. He smiled as he 
answered, “It was more interesting,” adding that the Linda problem had 
attracted so much attention that we had no reason to complain. 

Speaking of Less is More 


“They constructed a very complicated scenario and insisted on 
calling it highly probable. It is not—it is only a plausible story.” 


“They added a cheap gift to the expensive product, and made the 
whole deal less attractive. Less is more in this case.” 


“In most situations, a direct comparison makes people more 
careful and more logical. But not always. Sometimes intuition 
beats logic even when the correct answer stares you in the face.” 



Causes Trump Statistics 

Consider the following scenario and note your intuitive answer to the 
question. 


A cab was involved in a hit-and-run accident at night. 

Two cab companies, the Green and the Blue, operate in the city. 
You are given the following data: 


• 85% of the cabs in the city are Green and 15% are Blue. 

• A witness identified the cab as Blue. The court tested the reliability of 
the witness under the circumstances that existed on the night of the 
accident and concluded that the witness correctly identified each one 
of the two colors 80% of the time and failed 20% of the time. 


What is the probability that the cab involved in the accident was 
Blue rather than Green? 

This is a standard problem of Bayesian inference. There are two items of 
information: a base rate and the imperfectly reliable testimony of a witness. 
In the absence of a witness, the probability of the guilty cab being Blue is 
15%, which is the base rate of that outcome. If the two cab companies had 
been equally large, the base rate would be uninformative and you would 
consider only the reliability of the witness,%"&gt; ourw 

Causal Stereotypes 

Now consider a variation of the same story, in which only the presentation 
of the base rate has been altered. 

You are given the following data: 


The two companies operate the same number of cabs, but Green 
cabs are involved in 85% of accidents. 



• The information about the witness is as in the previous version. 


The two versions of the problem are mathematically indistinguishable, but 
they are psychologically quite different. People who read the first version 
do not know how to use the base rate and often ignore it. In contrast, 
people who see the second version give considerable weight to the base 
rate, and their average judgment is not too far from the Bayesian solution. 
Why? 

In the first version, the base rate of Blue cabs is a statistical fact about 
the cabs in the city. A mind that is hungry for causal stories finds nothing to 
chew on: How does the number of Green and Blue cabs in the city cause 
this cab driver to hit and run? 

In the second version, in contrast, the drivers of Green cabs cause more 
than 5 times as many accidents as the Blue cabs do. The conclusion is 
immediate: the Green drivers must be a collection of reckless madmen! 
You have now formed a stereotype of Green recklessness, which you apply 
to unknown individual drivers in the company. The stereotype is easily 
fitted into a causal story, because recklessness is a causally relevant fact 
about individual cabdrivers. In this version, there are two causal stories that 
need to be combined or reconciled. The first is the hit and run, which 
naturally evokes the idea that a reckless Green driver was responsible. 
The second is the witness’s testimony, which strongly suggests the cab 
was Blue. The inferences from the two stories about the color of the car are 
contradictory and approximately cancel each other. The chances for the 
two colors are about equal (the Bayesian estimate is 41%, reflecting the 
fact that the base rate of Green cabs is a little more extreme than the 
reliability of the witness who reported a Blue cab). 

The cab example illustrates two types of base rates. Statistical base 
rates are facts about a population to which a case belongs, but they are 
not relevant to the individual case. Causal base rates change your view of 
how the individual case came to be. The two types of base-rate 
information are treated differently: 


• Statistical base rates are generally underweighted, and sometimes 
neglected altogether, when specific information about the case at 
hand is available. 

• Causal base rates are treated as information about the individual 
case and are easily combined with other case-specific information. 



The causal version of the cab problem had the form of a stereotype: Green 
drivers are dangerous. Stereotypes are statements about the group that 
are (at least tentatively) accepted as facts about every member. Hely re 
are two examples: 

Most of the graduates of this inner-city school go to college. 

Interest in cycling is widespread in France. 

These statements are readily interpreted as setting up a propensity in 
individual members of the group, and they fit in a causal story. Many 
graduates of this particular inner-city school are eager and able to go to 
college, presumably because of some beneficial features of life in that 
school. There are forces in French culture and social life that cause many 
Frenchmen to take an interest in cycling. You will be reminded of these 
facts when you think about the likelihood that a particular graduate of the 
school will attend college, or when you wonder whether to bring up the Tour 
de France in a conversation with a Frenchman you just met. 


Stereotyping is a bad word in our culture, but in my usage it is neutral. One 
of the basic characteristics of System 1 is that it represents categories as 
norms and prototypical exemplars. This is how we think of horses, 
refrigerators, and New \brk police officers; we hold in memory a 
representation of one or more “normal” members of each of these 
categories. When the categories are social, these representations are 
called stereotypes. Some stereotypes are perniciously wrong, and hostile 
stereotyping can have dreadful consequences, but the psychological facts 
cannot be avoided: stereotypes, both correct and false, are how we think 
of categories. 

\bu may note the irony. In the context of the cab problem, the neglect of 
base-rate information is a cognitive flaw, a failure of Bayesian reasoning, 
and the reliance on causal base rates is desirable. Stereotyping the Green 
drivers improves the accuracy of judgment. In other contexts, however, 
such as hiring or profiling, there is a strong social norm against 
stereotyping, which is also embedded in the law. This is as it should be. In 
sensitive social contexts, we do not want to draw possibly erroneous 
conclusions about the individual from the statistics of the group. We 
consider it morally desirable for base rates to be treated as statistical facts 
about the group rather than as presumptive facts about individuals. In other 
words, we reject causal base rates. 

The social norm against stereotyping, including the opposition to 



profiling, has been highly beneficial in creating a more civilized and more 
equal society. It is useful to remember, however, that neglecting valid 
stereotypes inevitably results in suboptimal judgments. Resistance to 
stereotyping is a laudable moral position, but the simplistic idea that the 
resistance is costless is wrong. The costs are worth paying to achieve a 
better society, but denying that the costs exist, while satisfying to the soul 
and politically correct, is not scientifically defensible. Reliance on the affect 
heuristic is common in politically charged arguments. The positions we 
favor have no cost and those we oppose have no benefits. We should be 
able to do better. 


Causal Situations 

Amos and I constructed the variants of the cab problem, but we did not 
invent the powerful notion of causal base rates; we borrowed it from the 
psychologist leek Ajzen. In his experiment, Ajzen showed his participants 
brief vignettes describing some students who had taken an exam at Yale 
and asked the participants to judge the probability that each student had 
passed the test. The manipulation of causal bs oase rates was 
straightforward: Ajzen told one group that the students they saw had been 
drawn from a class in which 75% passed the exam, and told another group 
that the same students had been in a class in which only 25% passed. This 
is a powerful manipulation, because the base rate of passing suggests the 
immediate inference that the test that only 25% passed must have been 
brutally difficult. The difficulty of a test is, of course, one of the causal 
factors that determine every student’s outcome. As expected, Ajzen’s 
subjects were highly sensitive to the causal base rates, and every student 
was judged more likely to pass in the high-success condition than in the 
high-failure rate. 

Ajzen used an ingenious method to suggest a noncausal base rate. He 
told his subjects that the students they saw had been drawn from a sample, 
which itself was constructed by selecting students who had passed or 
failed the exam. For example, the information for the high-failure group 
read as follows: 

The investigator was mainly interested in the causes of failure 
and constructed a sample in which 75% had failed the 
examination. 

Note the difference. This base rate is a purely statistical fact about the 
ensemble from which cases have been drawn. It has no bearing on the 
question asked, which is whether the individual student passed or failed 



the test. As expected, the explicitly stated base rates had some effects on 
judgment, but they had much less impact than the statistically equivalent 
causal base rates. System 1 can deal with stories in which the elements 
are causally linked, but it is weak in statistical reasoning. For a Bayesian 
thinker, of course, the versions are equivalent. It is tempting to conclude 
that we have reached a satisfactory conclusion: causal base rates are 
used; merely statistical facts are (more or less) neglected. The next study, 
one of my all-time favorites, shows that the situation is rather more 
complex. 


Can Psychology be Taught? 

The reckless cabdrivers and the impossibly difficult exam illustrate two 
inferences that people can draw from causal base rates: a stereotypical 
trait that is attributed to an individual, and a significant feature of the 
situation that affects an individual’s outcome. The participants in the 
experiments made the correct inferences and their judgments improved. 
Unfortunately, things do not always work out so well. The classic 
experiment I describe next shows that people will not draw from base-rate 
information an inference that conflicts with other beliefs. It also supports the 
uncomfortable conclusion that teaching psychology is mostly a waste of 
time. 

The experiment was conducted a long time ago by the social 
psychologist Richard Nisbett and his student Eugene Borgida, at the 
University of Michigan. They told students about the renowned “helping 
experiment” that had been conducted a few years earlier at New Y)rk 
University. Participants in that experiment were led to individual booths 
and invited to speak over the intercom about their personal lives and 
problems. They were to talk in turn for about two minutes. Only one 
microphone was active at any one time. There were six participants in 
each group, one of whom was a stooge. The stooge spoke first, following 
a script prepared by the experimenters. He described his problems 
adjusting to New York and admitted with obvious embarrassment that he 
was prone to seizures, especially when stressed. All the participants then 
had a turn. When the microphone was again turned over to the stooge, he 
became agitated and incoherent, said he felt a seizure coming on, andpeo 
asked for someone to help him. The last words heard from him were, “C- 
could somebody-er-er-help-er-uh-uh-uh [choking sounds]. L.l’m gonna die- 
er-er-er I’m...gonna die-er-er-l seizure l-er [chokes, then quiet].” At this 
point the microphone of the next participant automatically became active, 
and nothing more was heard from the possibly dying individual. 



What do you think the participants in the experiment did? So far as the 
participants knew, one of them was having a seizure and had asked for 
help. However, there were several other people who could possibly 
respond, so perhaps one could stay safely in one’s booth. These were the 
results: only four of the fifteen participants responded immediately to the 
appeal for help. Six never got out of their booth, and five others came out 
only well after the “seizure victim” apparently choked. The experiment 
shows that individuals feel relieved of responsibility when they know that 
others have heard the same request for help. 

Did the results surprise you? Very probably. Most of us think of 
ourselves as decent people who would rush to help in such a situation, and 
we expect other decent people to do the same. The point of the 
experiment, of course, was to show that this expectation is wrong. Even 
normal, decent people do not rush to help when they expect others to take 
on the unpleasantness of dealing with a seizure. And that means you, too. 

Are you willing to endorse the following statement? “When I read the 
procedure of the helping experiment I thought I would come to the 
stranger’s help immediately, as I probably would if I found myself alone with 
a seizure victim. I was probably wrong. If I find myself in a situation in which 
other people have an opportunity to help, I might not step forward. The 
presence of others would reduce my sense of personal responsibility more 
than I initially thought.” This is what a teacher of psychology would hope you 
would learn. Would you have made the same inferences by yourself? 

The psychology professor who describes the helping experiment wants 
the students to view the low base rate as causal, just as in the case of the 
fictitious Yale exam. He wants them to infer, in both cases, that a 
surprisingly high rate of failure implies a very difficult test. The lesson 
students are meant to take away is that some potent feature of the 
situation, such as the diffusion of responsibility, induces normal and decent 
people such as them to behave in a surprisingly unhelpful way. 

Changing one’s mind about human nature is hard work, and changing 
one’s mind for the worse about oneself is even harder. Nisbett and 
Borgida suspected that students would resist the work and the 
unpleasantness. Of course, the students would be able and willing to recite 
the details of the helping experiment on a test, and would even repeat the 
“official” interpretation in terms of diffusion of responsibility. But did their 
beliefs about human nature really change? To find out, Nisbett and Borgida 
showed them videos of brief interviews allegedly conducted with two 
people who had participated in the New York study. The interviews were 
short and bland. The interviewees appeared to be nice, normal, decent 
people. They described their hobbies, their spare-time activities, and their 
plans for the future, which were entirely conventional. After watching the 



video of an interview, the students guessed how quickly that particular 
person had come to the aid of the stricken stranger. 


To apply Bayesian reasoning to the task the students were assigned, you 
should first ask yourself what you would have guessed about the a stwo 
individuals if you had not seen their interviews. This question is answered 
by consulting the base rate. We have been told that only 4 of the 15 
participants in the experiment rushed to help after the first request. The 
probability that an unidentified participant had been immediately helpful is 
therefore 27%. Thus your prior belief about any unspecified participant 
should be that he did not rush to help. Next, Bayesian logic requires you to 
adjust your judgment in light of any relevant information about the 
individual. However, the videos were carefully designed to be 
uninformative; they provided no reason to suspect that the individuals 
would be either more or less helpful than a randomly chosen student. In the 
absence of useful new information, the Bayesian solution is to stay with the 
base rates. 

Nisbett and Borgida asked two groups of students to watch the videos 
and predict the behavior of the two individuals. The students in the first 
group were told only about the procedure of the helping experiment, not 
about its results. Their predictions reflected their views of human nature 
and their understanding of the situation. As you might expect, they 
predicted that both individuals would immediately rush to the victim’s aid. 
The second group of students knew both the procedure of the experiment 
and its results. The comparison of the predictions of the two groups 
provides an answer to a significant question: Did students learn from the 
results of the helping experiment anything that significantly changed their 
way of thinking? The answer is straightforward: they learned nothing at all. 
Their predictions about the two individuals were indistinguishable from the 
predictions made by students who had not been exposed to the statistical 
results of the experiment. They knew the base rate in the group from which 
the individuals had been drawn, but they remained convinced that the 
people they saw on the video had been quick to help the stricken stranger. 

For teachers of psychology, the implications of this study are 
disheartening. When we teach our students about the behavior of people in 
the helping experiment, we expect them to learn something they had not 
known before; we wish to change how they think about people’s behavior 
in a particular situation. This goal was not accomplished in the Nisbett- 
Borgida study, and there is no reason to believe that the results would have 
been different if they had chosen another surprising psychological 



experiment. Indeed, Nisbett and Borgida reported similar findings in 
teaching another study, in which mild social pressure caused people to 
accept much more painful electric shocks than most of us (and them) 
would have expected. Students who do not develop a new appreciation for 
the power of social setting have learned nothing of value from the 
experiment. The predictions they make about random strangers, or about 
their own behavior, indicate that they have not changed their view of how 
they would have behaved. In the words of Nisbett and Borgida, students 
“quietly exempt themselves” (and their friends and acquaintances) from the 
conclusions of experiments that surprise them. Teachers of psychology 
should not despair, however, because Nisbett and Borgida report a way to 
make their students appreciate the point of the helping experiment. They 
took a new group of students and taught them the procedure of the 
experiment but did not tell them the group results. They showed the two 
videos and simply told their students that the two individuals they had just 
seen had not helped the stranger, then asked them to guess the global 
results. The outcome was dramatic: the students’ guesses were extremely 
accurate. 

To teach students any psychology they did not know before, you must 
surprise them. But which surprise will do? Nisbett and Borgida found that 
when they presented their students with a surprising statisticis al fact, the 
students managed to learn nothing at all. But when the students were 
surprised by individual cases—two nice people who had not helped—they 
immediately made the generalization and inferred that helping is more 
difficult than they had thought. Nisbett and Borgida summarize the results 
in a memorable sentence: 

Subjects’ unwillingness to deduce the particular from the general 
was matched only by their willingness to infer the general from the 
particular. 

This is a profoundly important conclusion. People who are taught 
surprising statistical facts about human behavior may be impressed to the 
point of telling their friends about what they have heard, but this does not 
mean that their understanding of the world has really changed. The test of 
learning psychology is whether your understanding of situations you 
encounter has changed, not whether you have learned a new fact. There is 
a deep gap between our thinking about statistics and our thinking about 
individual cases. Statistical results with a causal interpretation have a 
stronger effect on our thinking than noncausal information. But even 
compelling causal statistics will not change long-held beliefs or beliefs 
rooted in personal experience. On the other hand, surprising individual 



cases have a powerful impact and are a more effective tool for teaching 
psychology because the incongruity must be resolved and embedded in a 
causal story. That is why this book contains questions that are addressed 
personally to the reader. You are more likely to learn something by finding 
surprises in your own behavior than by hearing surprising facts about 
people in general. 

Speaking of Causes and Statistics 


“We can’t assume that they will really learn anything from mere 
statistics. Let’s show them one or two representative individual 
cases to influence their System 1 


“No need to worry about this statistical information being ignored. 
On the contrary, it will immediately be used to feed a stereotype.” 



Regression to the Mean 


I had one of the most satisfying eureka experiences of my career while 
teaching flight instructors in the Israeli Air Force about the psychology of 
effective training. I was telling them about an important principle of skill 
training: rewards for improved performance work better than punishment of 
mistakes. This proposition is supported by much evidence from research 
on pigeons, rats, humans, and other animals. 

When I finished my enthusiastic speech, one of the most seasoned 
instructors in the group raised his hand and made a short speech of his 
own. He began by conceding that rewarding improved performance might 
be good for the birds, but he denied that it was optimal for flight cadets. 
This is what he said: “On many occasions I have praised flight cadets for 
clean execution of some aerobatic maneuver. The next time they try the 
same maneuver they usually do worse. On the other hand, I have often 
screamed into a cadet’s earphone for bad execution, and in general he 
does better 11 ask yry abr two repon his next try. So please don’t tell us that 
reward works and punishment does not, because the opposite is the 
case.” 

This was a joyous moment of insight, when I saw in a new light a 
principle of statistics that I had been teaching for years. The instructor was 
right—but he was also completely wrong! His observation was astute and 
correct: occasions on which he praised a performance were likely to be 
followed by a disappointing performance, and punishments were typically 
followed by an improvement. But the inference he had drawn about the 
efficacy of reward and punishment was completely off the mark. What he 
had observed is known as regression to the mean, which in that case was 
due to random fluctuations in the quality of performance. Naturally, he 
praised only a cadet whose performance was far better than average. But 
the cadet was probably just lucky on that particular attempt and therefore 
likely to deteriorate regardless of whether or not he was praised. Similarly, 
the instructor would shout into a cadet’s earphones only when the cadet’s 
performance was unusually bad and therefore likely to improve regardless 
of what the instructor did. The instructor had attached a causal 
interpretation to the inevitable fluctuations of a random process. 

The challenge called for a response, but a lesson in the algebra of 
prediction would not be enthusiastically received. Instead, I used chalk to 
mark a target on the floor. I asked every officer in the room to turn his back 
to the target and throw two coins at it in immediate succession, without 
looking. We measured the distances from the target and wrote the two 
results of each contestant on the blackboard. Then we rewrote the results 



in order, from the best to the worst performance on the first try. tt was 
apparent that most (but not all) of those who had done best the first time 
deteriorated on their second try, and those who had done poorly on the first 
attempt generally improved. I pointed out to the instructors that what they 
saw on the board coincided with what we had heard about the 
performance of aerobatic maneuvers on successive attempts: poor 
performance was typically followed by improvement and good 
performance by deterioration, without any help from either praise or 
punishment. 

The discovery I made on that day was that the flight instructors were 
trapped in an unfortunate contingency: because they punished cadets 
when performance was poor, they were mostly rewarded by a subsequent 
improvement, even if punishment was actually ineffective. Furthermore, the 
instructors were not alone in that predicament. I had stumbled onto a 
significant fact of the human condition: the feedback to which life exposes 
us is perverse. Because we tend to be nice to other people when they 
please us and nasty when they do not, we are statistically punished for 
being nice and rewarded for being nasty. 

Talent and Luck 

A few years ago, John Brockman, who edits the online magazine Edge, 
asked a number of scientists to report their “favorite equation.” These were 
my offerings: 

success = talent + luck 

great success = a little more talent + a lot of luck 

The unsurprising idea that luck often contributes to success has surprising 
consequences when we apply it to the first two days of a high-level golf 
tournament. To keep things simple, assume that on both days the average 
score of the competitors was at par 72. We focus on a player who did 
verye d well on the first day, closing with a score of 66. What can we learn 
from that excellent score? An immediate inference is that the golfer is 
more talented than the average participant in the tournament. The formula 
for success suggests that another inference is equally justified: the golfer 
who did so well on day 1 probably enjoyed better-than-average luck on that 
day. If you accept that talent and luck both contribute to success, the 
conclusion that the successful golfer was lucky is as warranted as the 
conclusion that he is talented. 

By the same token, if you focus on a player who scored 5 over par on 



that day, you have reason to infer both that he is rather weak and had a 
bad day Of course, you know that neither of these inferences is certain. It 
is entirely possible that the player who scored 77 is actually very talented 
but had an exceptionally dreadful day Uncertain though they are, the 
following inferences from the score on day 1 are plausible and will be 
correct more often than they are wrong. 

above-average score on day 1 = above-average talent + lucky on 
day 1 


and 


below-average score on day 1 = below-average talent + unlucky 
on day 1 

Now, suppose you know a golfer’s score on day 1 and are asked to 
predict his score on day 2. You expect the golfer to retain the same level of 
talent on the second day, so your best guesses will be “above average” for 
the first player and “below average” for the second player. Luck, of course, 
is a different matter. Since you have no way of predicting the golfers’ luck 
on the second (or any) day, your best guess must be that it will be average, 
neither good nor bad. This means that in the absence of any other 
information, your best guess about the players’ score on day 2 should not 
be a repeat of their performance on day 1. This is the most you can say: 


• The golfer who did well on day 1 is likely to be successful on day 2 as 
well, but less than on the first, because the unusual luck he probably 
enjoyed on day 1 is unlikely to hold. 

• The golfer who did poorly on day 1 will probably be below average 
on day 2, but will improve, because his probable streak of bad luck is 
not likely to continue. 


We also expect the difference between the two golfers to shrink on the 
second day, although our best guess is that the first player will still do 
better than the second. 

My students were always surprised to hear that the best predicted 
performance on day 2 is more moderate, closer to the average than the 
evidence on which it is based (the score on day 1). This is why the pattern 
is called regression to the mean. The more extreme the original score, the 



more regression we expect, because an extremely good score suggests a 
very lucky day. The regressive prediction is reasonable, but its accuracy is 
not guaranteed. A few of the golfers who scored 66 on day 1 will do even 
better on the second day, if their luck improves. Most will do worse, 
because their luck will no longer be above average. 

Now let us go against the time arrow. Arrange the players by their 
performance on day 2 and look at their performance on day 1. You will find 
precisely the same pattern of regression to the mean. The golfers who did 
best on day 2 were probably lucky on that day, and the best guess is that 
they had been less lucky and had done filess well on day 1. The fact that 
you observe regression when you predict an early event from a later event 
should help convince you that regression does not have a causal 
explanation. 

Regression effects are ubiquitous, and so are misguided causal stories 
to explain them. A well-known example is the “Sports Illustrated jinx,” the 
claim that an athlete whose picture appears on the cover of the magazine 
is doomed to perform poorly the following season. Overconfidence and the 
pressure of meeting high expectations are often offered as explanations. 
But there is a simpler account of the jinx: an athlete who gets to be on the 
cover of Sports Illustrated must have performed exceptional
ly well in the 
preceding season, probably with the assistance of a nudge from luck—and 
luck is fickle. 

I happened to watch the men’s ski jump event in the Winter Olympics 
while Amos and I were writing an article about intuitive prediction. Each 
athlete has two jumps in the event, and the results are combined for the 
final score. I was startled to hear the sportscaster’s comments while 
athletes were preparing for their second jump: “Norway had a great first 
jump; he will be tense, hoping to protect his lead and will probably do 
worse” or “Sweden had a bad first jump and now he knows he has nothing 
to lose and will be relaxed, which should help him do better.” The 
commentator had obviously detected regression to the mean and had 
invented a causal story for which there was no evidence. The story itself 
could even be true. Perhaps if we measured the athletes’ pulse before 
each jump we might find that they are indeed more relaxed after a bad first 
jump. And perhaps not. The point to remember is that the change from the 
first to the second jump does not need a causal explanation. It is a 
mathematically inevitable consequence of the fact that luck played a role in 
the outcome of the first jump. Not a very satisfactory story—we would all 
prefer a causal account—but that is all there is. 


Understanding Regression 



Whether undetected or wrongly explained, the phenomenon of regression 
is strange to the human mind. So strange, indeed, that it was first identified 
and understood two hundred years after the theory of gravitation and 
differential calculus. Furthermore, it took one of the best minds of 
nineteenth-century Britain to make sense of it, and that with great difficulty. 

Regression to the mean was discovered and named late in the 
nineteenth century by Sir Francis Galton, a half cousin of Charles Darwin 
and a renowned polymath. You can sense the thrill of discovery in an article 
he published in 1886 under the title “Regression towards Mediocrity in 
Hereditary Stature,” which reports measurements of size in successive 
generations of seeds and in comparisons of the height of children to the 
height of their parents. He writes about his studies of seeds: 

They yielded results that seemed very noteworthy, and I used 
them as the basis of a lecture before the Royal Institution on 
February 9th, 1877. It appeared from these experiments that the 
offspring did not tend to resemble their parent seeds in size, but 
to be always more mediocre than they—to be smaller than the 
parents, if the parents were large; to be larger than the parents, if 
the parents were very small...The experiments showed further 
that the mean filial regression towards mediocrity was directly 
proportional to the parental deviation from it. 

Galton obviously expected his learned audience at the Royal Institution— 
the oldest independent research society in the world—to be as surprised 
by his “noteworthy observation” as he had been. What is truly noteworthy is 
that he was surprised by a statistical regularity that is as common as the 
air we breathe. Regression effects can be found wherever we look, but we 
do not recognize them for what they are. They hide in plain sight. It took 
Galton several years to work his way from his discovery of filial regression 
in size to the broader notion that regression inevitably occurs when the 
correlation between two measures is less than perfect, and he needed the 
help of the most brilliant statisticians of his time to reach that conclusion. 

One of the hurdles Galton had to overcome was the problem of 
measuring regression between variables that are measured on different 
scales, such as weight and piano playing. This is done by using the 
population as a standard of reference. Imagine that weight and piano 
playing have been measured for 100 children in all grades of an 
elementary school, and that they have been ranked from high to low on 
each measure. If Jane ranks third in piano playing and twenty-seventh in 
weight, it is appropriate to say that she is a better pianist than she is tall. 



Let us make some assumptions that will simplify things: 
At any age, 


• Piano-playing success depends only on weekly hours of practice. 

• Weight depends only on consumption of ice cream. 

• Ice cream consumption and weekly hours of practice are unrelated. 


Now, using ranks (or the standard scores that statisticians prefer), we can 
write some equations: 

weight = age + ice cream consumption 

piano playing = age + weekly hours of practice 

You can see that there will be regression to the mean when we predict 
piano playing from weight, or vice versa. If all you know about Tom is that 
he ranks twelfth in weight (well above average), you can infer (statistically) 
that he is probably older than average and also that he probably consumes 
more ice cream than other children. If all you know about Barbara is that 
she is eighty-fifth in piano (far below the average of the group), you can 
infer that she is likely to be young and that she is likely to practice less than 
most other children. 

The correlation coefficient between two measures, which varies 
between 0 and 1, is a measure of the relative weight of the factors they 
share. For example, we all share half our genes with each of our parents, 
and for traits in which environmental factors have relatively little influence, 
such as height, the correlation between parent and child is not far from .50. 
To appreciate the meaning of the correlation measure, the following are 
some examples of coefficients: 


• The correlation between the size of objects measured with precision 
in English or in metric units is 1. Any factor that influences one 
measure also influences the other; 100% of determinants are 
shared. 

• The correlation between self-reported height and weight among adult 
American males is .41. If you included women and children, the 
correlation would be much higher, because individuals’ gender and 
age influence both their height ann wd their weight, boosting the 



relative weight of shared factors. 

• The correlation between SAT scores and college GPA is 
approximately .60. However, the correlation between aptitude tests 
and success in graduate school is much lower, largely because 
measured aptitude varies little in this selected group. If everyone has 
similar aptitude, differences in this measure are unlikely to play a 
large role in measures of success. 

• The correlation between income and education level in the United 
States is approximately .40. 

• The correlation between family income and the last four digits of their 
phone number is 0. 


It took Francis Galton several years to figure out that correlation and 
regression are not two concepts—they are different perspectives on the 
same concept. The general rule is straightforward but has surprising 
consequences: whenever the correlation between two scores is imperfect, 
there will be regression to the mean. To illustrate Galton’s insight, take a 
proposition that most people find quite interesting: 

Highly intelligent women tend to marry men who are less 
intelligent than they are. 

You can get a good conversation started at a party by asking for an 
explanation, and your friends will readily oblige. Even people who have had 
some exposure to statistics will spontaneously interpret the statement in 
causal terms. Some may think of highly intelligent women wanting to avoid 
the competition of equally intelligent men, or being forced to compromise 
in their choice of spouse because intelligent men do not want to compete 
with intelligent women. More far-fetched explanations will come up at a 
good party. Now consider this statement: 

The correlation between the intelligence scores of spouses is 
less than perfect. 

This statement is obviously true and not interesting at all. Who would 
expect the correlation to be perfect? There is nothing to explain. But the 
statement you found interesting and the statement you found trivial are 
algebraically equivalent. If the correlation between the intelligence of 
spouses is less than perfect (and if men and women on average do not 
differ in intelligence), then it is a mathematical inevitability that highly 
intelligent women will be married to husbands who are on average less 



intelligent than they are (and vice versa, of course). The observed 
regression to the mean cannot be more interesting or more explainable 
than the imperfect correlation. 

\bu probably sympathize with Galton’s struggle with the concept of 
regression. Indeed, the statistician David Freedman used to say that if the 
topic of regression comes up in a criminal or civil trial, the side that must 
explain regression to the jury will lose the case. Why is it so hard? The 
main reason for the difficulty is a recurrent theme of this book: our mind is 
strongly biased toward causal explanations and does not deal well with 
“mere statistics.” When our attention is called to an event, associative 
memory will look for its cause—more precisely, activation will automatically 
spread to any cause that is already stored in memory. Causal explanations 
will be evoked when regression is detected, but they will be wrong 
because the truth is that regression to the mean has an explanation but 
does not have a cause. The event that attracts our attention in the golfing 
tournament is the frequent deterioration of the performance of the golfers 
who werecte successful on day 1. The best explanation of it is that those 
golfers were unusually lucky that day, but this explanation lacks the causal 
force that our minds prefer. Indeed, we pay people quite well to provide 
interesting explanations of regression effects. A business commentator 
who correctly announces that “the business did better this year because it 
had done poorly last year” is likely to have a short tenure on the air. 


Our difficulties with the concept of regression originate with both System 1 
and System 2. Without special instruction, and in quite a few cases even 
after some statistical instruction, the relationship between correlation and 
regression remains obscure. System 2 finds it difficult to understand and 
learn. This is due in part to the insistent demand for causal interpretations, 
which is a feature of System 1. 

Depressed children treated with an energy drink improve 

significantly over a three-month period. 

I made up this newspaper headline, but the fact it reports is true: if you 
treated a group of depressed children for some time with an energy drink, 
they would show a clinically significant improvement. It is also the case that 
depressed children who spend some time standing on their head or hug a 
cat for twenty minutes a day will also show improvement. Most readers of 
such headlines will automatically infer that the energy drink or the cat 
hugging caused an improvement, but this conclusion is completely 
unjustified. Depressed children are an extreme group, they are more 



depressed than most other children—and extreme groups regress to the 
mean over time. The correlation between depression scores on 
successive occasions of testing is less than perfect, so there will be 
regression to the mean: depressed children will get somewhat better over 
time even if they hug no cats and drink no Red Bull. In order to conclude 
that an energy drink—or any other treatment—is effective, you must 
compare a group of patients who receive this treatment to a “control group” 
that receives no treatment (or, better, receives a placebo). The control 
group is expected to improve by regression alone, and the aim of the 
experiment is to determine whether the treated patients improve more than 
regression can explain. 

Incorrect causal interpretations of regression effects are not restricted to 
readers of the popular press. The statistician Howard Wainer has drawn 
up a long list of eminent researchers who have made the same mistake— 
confusing mere correlation with causation. Regression effects are a 
common source of trouble in research, and experienced scientists develop 
a healthy fear of the trap of unwarranted causal inference. 


One of my favorite examples of the errors of intuitive prediction is adapted 
from Max Bazerman’s excellent text Judgment in Managerial Decision 
Making: 


You are the sales forecaster for a department store chain. All 
stores are similar in size and merchandise selection, but their 
sales differ because of location, competition, and random 
factors. You are given the results for 2011 and asked to forecast 
sales for 2012. You have been instructed to accept the overall 
forecast of economists that sales will increase overall by 10%. 
How would you complete the following table? 


Store 2011 2012 

1 $ 11 , 000,000 _ 

2 $23,000,000 _ 

3 $18,000,000 _ 

4 $29,000,000 _ 

Total $61,000,000 $67,100,000 


Having read this chapter, you know that the obvious solution of adding 



10% to the sales of each store is wrong. You want your forecasts to be 
regressive, which requires adding more than 10% to the iow-performing 
branches and adding less (or even subtracting) to others. But if you ask 
other people, you are likely to encounter puzzlement: Why do you bother 
them with an obvious question? As Galton painfully discovered, the 
concept of regression is far from obvious. 

Speaking of Regression to Mediocrity 


“She says experience has taught her that criticism is more 
effective than praise. What she doesn’t understand is that it’s all 
due to regression to the mean.” 


“Perhaps his second interview was less impressive than the 
first because he was afraid of disappointing us, but more likely it 
was his first that was unusually good.” 


“Our screening procedure is good but not perfect, so we should 
anticipate regression. We shouldn’t be surprised that the very 
best candidates often fail to meet our expectations.” 



Taming Intuitive Predictions 


Life presents us with many occasions to forecast. Economists forecast 
inflation and unemployment, financial analysts forecast earnings, military 
experts predict casualties, venture capitalists assess profitability, 
publishers and producers predict audiences, contractors estimate the time 
required to complete projects, chefs anticipate the demand for the dishes 
on their menu, engineers estimate the amount of concrete needed for a 
building, fireground commanders assess the number of trucks that will be 
needed to put out a fire. In our private lives, we forecast our spouse’s 
reaction to a proposed move or our own future adjustment to a new job. 

Some predictive judgments, such as those made by engineers, rely 
largely on look-up tables, precise calculations, and explicit analyses of 
outcomes observed on similar occasions. Others involve intuition and 
System 1, in two main varieties. Some intuitions draw primarily on skill and 
expertise acquired by repeated experience. The rapid and automatic 
judgments and choices of chess masters, fireground commanders, and 
physicians that Gary Klein has described in Sources of Power and 
elsewhere illustrate these skilled intuitions, in which a solution to the current 
problem comes to mind quickly because familiar cues are recognized. 

Other intuitions, which are sometimes subjectively indistinguishable from 
the first, arise from the operation of heuristics that often substitute an easy 
question for the harder one that was asked. Intuitive judgments can be 
made with high confidence even when they are based on nonregressive 
assessments of weak evidence. Of course, many judgments, especially in 
the professional domain, are influenced by a combination of analysis and 
intuition. 


Nonregressive Intuitions 

Let us return to a person we have already met: 

Julie is currently a senior in a state university. She read fluently 
when she was four years old. What is her grade point average 
(GPA)? 

People who are familiar with the American educational scene quickly 
come up with a number, which is often in the vicinity of 3.7 or 3.8. How 
does this occur? Several operations of System 1 are involved. 



• A causal link between the evidence (Julie’s reading) and the target of 
the prediction (her GPA) is sought. The link can be indirect. In this 
instance, early reading and a high GDP are both indications of 
academic talent. Some connection is necessary. \bu (your System 
2) would probably reject as irrelevant a report of Julie winning a fly 
fishing competitiowhired D=n or excelling at weight lifting in high 
school. The process is effectively dichotomous. We are capable of 
rejecting information as irrelevant or false, but adjusting for smaller 
weaknesses in the evidence is not something that System 1 can do. 
As a result, intuitive predictions are almost completely insensitive to 
the actual predictive quality of the evidence. When a link is found, as 
in the case of Julie’s early reading, WY SIATI applies: your 
associative memory quickly and automatically constructs the best 
possible story from the information available. 

• Next, the evidence is evaluated in relation to a relevant norm. How 
precocious is a child who reads fluently at age four? What relative 
rank or percentile score corresponds to this achievement? The 
group to which the child is compared (we call it a reference group) is 
not fully specified, but this is also the rule in normal speech: if 
someone graduating from college is described as “quite clever” you 
rarely need to ask, ‘When you say ‘quite clever,’ which reference 
group do you have in mind?” 

• The next step involves substitution and intensity matching. The 
evaluation of the flimsy evidence of cognitive ability in childhood is 
substituted as an answer to the question about her college GPA. 
Julie will be assigned the same percentile score for her GPA and for 
her achievements as an early reader. 

• The question specified that the answer must be on the GPA scale, 
which requires another intensity-matching operation, from a general 
impression of Julie’s academic achievements to the GPA that 
matches the evidence for her talent. The final step is a translation, 
from an impression of Julie’s relative academic standing to the GPA 
that corresponds to it. 


Intensity matching yields predictions that are as extreme as the evidence 
on which they are based, leading people to give the same answer to two 
quite different questions: 


What is Julie’s percentile score on reading precocity? 
What is Julie’s percentile score on GPA? 



By now you should easily recognize that all these operations are 
features of System 1. I listed them here as an orderly sequence of steps, 
but of course the spread of activation in associative memory does not 
work this way. You should imagine a process of spreading activation that 
is initially prompted by the evidence and the question, feeds back upon 
itself, and eventually settles on the most coherent solution possible. 


Amos and I once asked participants in an experiment to judge 
descriptions of eight college freshmen, allegedly written by a counselor on 
the basis of interviews of the entering class. Each description consisted of 
five adjectives, as in the following example: 

intelligent, self-confident, well-read, hardworking, inquisitive 

We asked some participants to answer two questions: 

How much does this description impress you with respect to 
academic ability? 


What percentage of descriptions of freshmen do you believe 
would impress you more? 

The questions require you to evaluate the evidence by comparing the 
description to your norm for descriptions of students by counselors. The 
very existence of such a norm is remarkable. Although you surely do not 
know how you acquired it, you have a fairly clear sense of how much 
enthusiasm the description conveys: the counselor believes that this 
student is good, but not spectacularly good. There is room for stronger 
adjectives than intelligent (brilliant, creative), veil-read ( scholarly ; erudite, 
impressively knovJedgeabie), and hardvorking (passionate, 
perfectionist). The verdict: very likely to be in the top 15% but unlikely to be 
in the top 3%. There is impressive consensus in such judgments, at least 
within a culture. 

The other participants in our experiment were asked different questions: 

What is your estimate of the grade point average that the student 
will obtain? 

What is the percentage of freshmen who obtain a higher GPA? 


\t&gt;u need another look to detect the subtle difference between the two 



sets of questions. The difference should be obvious, but it is not. Unlike the 
first questions, which required you only to evaluate the evidence, the 
second set involves a great deal of uncertainty. The question refers to 
actual performance at the end of the freshman year. What happened 
during the year since the interview was performed? How accurately can 
you predict the student’s actual achievements in the first year at college 
from five adjectives? Would the counselor herself be perfectly accurate if 
she predicted GPA from an interview? 

The objective of this study was to compare the percentile judgments that 
the participants made when evaluating the evidence in one case, and 
when predicting the ultimate outcome in another. The results are easy to 
summarize: the judgments were identical. Although the two sets of 
questions differ (one is about the description, the other about the student’s 
future academic performance), the participants treated them as if they 
were the same. As was the case with Julie, the prediction of the future is 
not distinguished from an evaluation of current evidence—prediction 
matches evaluation. This is perhaps the best evidence we have for the role 
of substitution. People are asked for a prediction but they substitute an 
evaluation of the evidence, without noticing that the question they answer is 
not the one they were asked. This process is guaranteed to generate 
predictions that are systematically biased; they completely ignore 
regression to the mean. 

During my military service in the Israeli Defense Forces, I spent some 
time attached to a unit that selected candidates for officer training on the 
basis of a series of interviews and field tests. The designated criterion for 
successful prediction was a cadet’s final grade in officer school. The 
validity of the ratings was known to be rather poor (I will tell more about it in 
a later chapter). The unit still existed years later, when I was a professor 
and collaborating with Amos in the study of intuitive judgment. I had good 
contacts with the people at the unit and asked them for a favor. In addition 
to the usual grading system they used to evaluate the candidates, I asked 
for their best guess of the grade that each of the future cadets would obtain 
in officer school. They collected a few hundred such forecasts. The officers 
who had produced the prediof pctions were all familiar with the letter 
grading system that the school applied to its cadets and the approximate 
proportions of A’s, B’s, etc., among them. The results were striking: the 
relative frequency of A’s and B’s in the predictions was almost identical to 
the frequencies in the final grades of the school. 

These findings provide a compelling example of both substitution and 
intensity matching. The officers who provided the predictions completely 
failed to discriminate between two tasks: 



• their usual mission, which was to evaluate the performance of 
candidates during their stay at the unit 

• the task I had asked them to perform, which was an actual prediction 
of a future grade 


They had simply translated their own grades onto the scale used in officer 
school, applying intensity matching. Once again, the failure to address the 
(considerable) uncertainty of their predictions had led them to predictions 
that were completely nonregressive. 

A Correction for Intuitive Predictions 

Back to Julie, our precocious reader. The correct way to predict her GPA 
was introduced in the preceding chapter. As I did there for golf on 
successive days and for weight and piano playing, I write a schematic 
formula for the factors that determine reading age and college grades: 

reading age = shared factors + factors specific to reading age = 

100 % 

GPA = shared factors + factors specific to GPA = 100% 

The shared factors involve genetically determined aptitude, the degree to 
which the family supports academic interests, and anything else that would 
cause the same people to be precocious readers as children and 
academically successful as young adults. Of course there are many factors 
that would affect one of these outcomes and not the other. Julie could have 
been pushed to read early by overly ambitious parents, she may have had 
an unhappy love affair that depressed her college grades, she could have 
had a skiing accident during adolescence that left her slightly impaired, 
and so on. 

Recall that the correlation between two measures—in the present case 
reading age and GPA—is equal to the proportion of shared factors among 
their determinants. What is your best guess about that proportion? My 
most optimistic guess is about 30%. Assuming this estimate, we have all 
we need to produce an unbiased prediction. Here are the directions for 
how to get there in four simple steps: 



1. Start with an estimate of average GPA. 

2. Determine the GPA that matches your impression of the evidence. 

3. Estimate the correlation between your evidence and GPA. 

4. If the correlation is .30, move 30% of the distance from the average 
to the matching GPA. 


Step 1 gets you the baseline, the GPA you would have predicted if you 
were told nothing about Julie beyond the fact that she is a graduating 
senior. In the absence of information, you would have predicted the 
average. (This is similar to assigning the base-rate probability of business 
administration grahavpduates when you are told nothing about Tom W.) 
Step 2 is your intuitive prediction, which matches your evaluation of the 
evidence. Step 3 moves you from the baseline toward your intuition, but the 
distance you are allowed to move depends on your estimate of the 
correlation. You end up, at step 4, with a prediction that is influenced by 
your intuition but is far more moderate. 

This approach to prediction is general. You can apply it whenever you 
need to predict a quantitative variable, such as GPA, profit from an 
investment, or the growth of a company. The approach builds on your 
intuition, but it moderates it, regresses it toward the mean. When you have 
good reasons to trust the accuracy of your intuitive prediction—a strong 
correlation between the evidence and the prediction—the adjustment will 
be small. 

Intuitive predictions need to be corrected because they are not 
regressive and therefore are biased. Suppose that I predict for each golfer 
in a tournament that his score on day 2 will be the same as his score on 
day 1. This prediction does not allow for regression to the mean: the 
golfers who fared well on day 1 will on average do less well on day 2, and 
those who did poorly will mostly improve. When they are eventually 
compared to actual outcomes, nonregressive predictions will be found to 
be biased. They are on average overly optimistic for those who did best on 
the first day and overly pessimistic for those who had a bad start. The 
predictions are as extreme as the evidence. Similarly, if you use childhood 
achievements to predict grades in college without regressing your 
predictions toward the mean, you will more often than not be disappointed 
by the academic outcomes of early readers and happily surprised by the 
grades of those who learned to read relatively late. The corrected intuitive 
predictions eliminate these biases, so that predictions (both high and low) 
are about equally likely to overestimate and to underestimate the true 
value. You still make errors when your predictions are unbiased, but the 
errors are smaller and do not favor either high or low outcomes. 



A Defense of Extreme Predictions? 


I introduced Tom W earlier to illustrate predictions of discrete outcomes 
such as field of specialization or success in an examination, which are 
expressed by assigning a probability to a specified event (or in that case 
by ranking outcomes from the most to the least probable). I also described 
a procedure that counters the common biases of discrete prediction: 
neglect of base rates and insensitivity to the quality of information. 

The biases we find in predictions that are expressed on a scale, such as 
GPAor the revenue of a firm, are similar to the biases observed in judging 
the probabilities of outcomes. 

The corrective procedures are also similar: 


• Both contain a baseline prediction, which you would make if you 
knew nothing about the case at hand. In the categorical case, it was 
the base rate. In the numerical case, it is the average outcome in the 
relevant category. 

• Both contain an intuitive prediction, which expresses the number that 
comes to your mind, whether it is a probability or a GPA. 

• In both cases, you aim for a prediction that is intermediate between 
the baseline and your intuitive response. 

• In the default case of no useful evidence, you stay with the baseline. 

• At the other extreme, you also stay with your initial predictiononsp. 
This will happen, of course, only if you remain completely confident in 
your initial prediction after a critical review of the evidence that 
supports it. 

• In most cases you will find some reason to doubt that the correlation 
between your intuitive judgment and the truth is perfect, and you will 
end up somewhere between the two poles. 


This procedure is an approximation of the likely results of an appropriate 
statistical analysis. If successful, it will move you toward unbiased 
predictions, reasonable assessments of probability, and moderate 
predictions of numerical outcomes. The two procedures are intended to 
address the same bias: intuitive predictions tend to be overconfident and 
overly extreme. 



Correcting your intuitive predictions is a task for System 2. Significant 
effort is required to find the relevant reference category, estimate the 
baseline prediction, and evaluate the quality of the evidence. The effort is 
justified only when the stakes are high and when you are particularly keen 
not to make mistakes. Furthermore, you should know that correcting your 
intuitions may complicate your life. A characteristic of unbiased predictions 
is that they permit the prediction of rare or extreme events only when the 
information is very good. If you expect your predictions to be of modest 
validity, you will never guess an outcome that is either rare or far from the 
mean. If your predictions are unbiased, you will never have the satisfying 
experience of correctly calling an extreme case. \bu will never be able to 
say, “I thought so!” when your best student in law school becomes a 
Supreme Court justice, or when a start-up that you thought very promising 
eventually becomes a major commercial success. Given the limitations of 
the evidence, you will never predict that an outstanding high school student 
will be a straight-A student at Princeton. For the same reason, a venture 
capitalist will never be told that the probability of success for a start-up in 
its early stages is “very high.” 

The objections to the principle of moderating intuitive predictions must 
be taken seriously, because absence of bias is not always what matters 
most. A preference for unbiased predictions is justified if all errors of 
prediction are treated alike, regardless of their direction. But there are 
situations in which one type of error is much worse than another. When a 
venture capitalist looks for “the next big thing,” the risk of missing the next 
Google or Facebook is far more important than the risk of making a 
modest investment in a start-up that ultimately fails. The goal of venture 
capitalists is to call the extreme cases correctly, even at the cost of 
overestimating the prospects of many other ventures. For a conservative 
banker making large loans, the risk of a single borrower going bankrupt 
may outweigh the risk of turning down several would-be clients who would 
fulfill their obligations. In such cases, the use of extreme language (“very 
good prospect,” “serious risk of default”) may have some justification for 
the comfort it provides, even if the information on which these judgments 
are based is of only modest validity. 

For a rational person, predictions that are unbiased and moderate 
should not present a problem. After all, the rational venture capitalist knows 
that even the most promising start-ups have only a moderate chance of 
success. She views her job as picking the most promising bets from the 
bets that are available and does not feel the need to delude herself about 
the prospects of a start-up in which she plans to invest. Similarly, rational 
individuals predicting the revenue of a firm will not be bound to a singleys p 
number—they should consider the range of uncertainty around the most 



likely outcome. A rational person will invest a large sum in an enterprise 
that is most likely to fail if the rewards of success are large enough, without 
deluding herself about the chances of success. However, we are not all 
rational, and some of us may need the security of distorted estimates to 
avoid paralysis. If you choose to delude yourself by accepting extreme 
predictions, however, you will do well to remain aware of your self- 
indulgence. 

Perhaps the most valuable contribution of the corrective procedures I 
propose is that they will require you to think about how much you know. I 
will use an example that is familiar in the academic world, but the 
analogies to other spheres of life are immediate. A department is about to 
hire a young professor and wants to choose the one whose prospects for 
scientific productivity are the best. The search committee has narrowed 
down the choice to two candidates: 

Kim recently completed her graduate work. Her 
recommendations are spectacular and she gave a brilliant talk 
and impressed everyone in her interviews. She has no 
substantial track record of scientific productivity. 


Jane has held a postdoctoral position for the last three years. 
She has been very productive and her research record is 
excellent, but her talk and interviews were less sparkling than 
Kim’s. 

The intuitive choice favors Kim, because she left a stronger impression, 
and WYSIATI. But it is also the case that there is much less information 
about Kim than about Jane. We are back to the law of small numbers. In 
effect, you have a smaller sample of information from Kim than from Jane, 
and extreme outcomes are much more likely to be observed in small 
samples. There is more luck in the outcomes of small samples, and you 
should therefore regress your prediction more deeply toward the mean in 
your prediction of Kim’s future performance. When you allow for the fact 
that Kim is likely to regress more than Jane, you might end up selecting 
Jane although you were less impressed by her. In the context of academic 
choices, I would vote for Jane, but it would be a struggle to overcome my 
intuitive impression that Kim is more promising. Following our intuitions is 
more natural, and somehow more pleasant, than acting against them. 

\bu can readily imagine similar problems in different contexts, such as a 
venture capitalist choosing between investments in two start-ups that 
operate in different markets. One start-up has a product for which demand 



can be estimated with fair precision. The other candidate is more exciting 
and intuitively promising, but its prospects are less certain. Whether the 
best guess about the prospects of the second start-up is still superior when 
the uncertainty is factored in is a question that deserves careful 
consideration. 

A Two-Systems View of Regression 

Extreme predictions and a willingness to predict rare events from weak 
evidence are both manifestations of System 1. It is natural for the 
associative machinery to match the extremeness of predictions to the 
perceived extremeness of evidence on which it is based—this is how 
substitution works. And it is natural for System 1 to generate overconfident 
judgments, because confidence, as we have seen, is determined by the 
coherence of the best story you can tell from the evidence at hand. Be 
warned: your intuitions will deliver predictions that are too extreme and you 
will be inclinehe pd to put far too much faith in them. 

Regression is also a problem for System 2. The very idea of regression 
to the mean is alien and difficult to communicate and comprehend. Galton 
had a hard time before he understood it. Many statistics teachers dread 
the class in which the topic comes up, and their students often end up with 
only a vague understanding of this crucial concept. This is a case where 
System 2 requires special training. Matching predictions to the evidence is 
not only something we do intuitively; it also seems a reasonable thing to 
do. We will not learn to understand regression from experience. Even when 
a regression is identified, as we saw in the story of the flight instructors, it 
will be given a causal interpretation that is almost always wrong. 

Speaking of Intuitive Predictions 


“That start-up achieved an outstanding proof of concept, but we 
shouldn’t expect them to do as well in the future. They are still a 
long way from the market and there is a lot of room for 
regression.” 


“Our intuitive prediction is very favorable, but it is probably too 
high. Let’s take into account the strength of our evidence and 
regress the prediction toward the mean.” 



“The investment may be a good idea, even if the best guess is 
that it will fail. Let's not say we really believe it is the next Google.” 


“I read one review of that brand and it was excellent. Still, that 
could have been a fluke. Let’s consider only the brands that have 
a large number of reviews and pick the one that looks best.” 



Part 3 



Overconfidence 



The Illusion of Understanding 


The trader-philosopher-statistician Nassim Taieb could also be 
considered a psychologist. In The Black Sv\an, Taieb introduced the notion 
of a narrative fallacy to describe how flawed stories of the past shape our 
views of the world and our expectations for the future. Narrative fallacies 
arise inevitably from our continuous attempt to make sense of the world. 
The explanatory stories that people find compelling are simple; are 
concrete rather than abstract; assign a larger role to talent, stupidity, and 
intentions than to luck; and focus on a few striking events that happened 
rather than on the countless events that failed to happen. Any recent salient 
event is a candidate to become the kernel of a causal narrative. Taieb 
suggests that we humans constantly fool ourselves by constructing flimsy 
accounts of the past and believing they are true. 

Good stories provide a simple and coherent account &gt; 

A compelling narrative fosters an illusion of inevitability. Consider the 
story of how Google turned into a giant of the technology industry. Two 
creative graduate students in the computer science department at 
Stanford University come up with a superior way of searching information 
on the Internet. They seek and obtain funding to start a company and make 
a series of decisions that work out well. Within a few years, the company 
they started is one of the most valuable stocks in America, and the two 
former graduate students are among the richest people on the planet. On 
one memorable occasion, they were lucky, which makes the story even 
more compelling: a year after founding Google, they were willing to sell 
their company for less than $1 million, but the buyer said the price was too 
high. Mentioning the single lucky incident actually makes it easier to 
underestimate the multitude of ways in which luck affected the outcome. 

A detailed history would specify the decisions of Google’s founders, but 
for our purposes it suffices to say that almost every choice they made had 
a good outcome. A more complete narrative would describe the actions of 
the firms that Google defeated. The hapless competitors would appear to 
be blind, slow, and altogether inadequate in dealing with the threat that 
eventually overwhelmed them. 

I intentionally told this tale blandly, but you get the idea: there is a very 
good story here. Fleshed out in more detail, the story could give you the 
sense that you understand what made Google succeed; it would also 
make you feel that you have learned a valuable general lesson about what 
makes businesses succeed. Unfortunately, there is good reason to believe 
that your sense of understanding and learning from the Google story is 
largely illusory. The ultimate test of an explanation is whether it would have 



made the event predictable in advance. No story of Google’s unlikely 
success will meet that test, because no story can include the myriad of 
events that would have caused a different outcome. The human mind does 
not deal well with nonevents. The fact that many of the important events that 
did occur involve choices further tempts you to exaggerate the role of skill 
and underestimate the part that luck played in the outcome. Because every 
critical decision turned out well, the record suggests almost flawless 
prescience—but bad luck could have disrupted any one of the successful 
steps. The halo effect adds the final touches, lending an aura of invincibility 
to the heroes of the story. 

Like watching a skilled rafter avoiding one potential calamity after 
another as he goes down the rapids, the unfolding of the Google story is 
thrilling because of the constant risk of disaster. However, there is fop an 
instructive difference between the two cases. The skilled rafter has gone 
down rapids hundreds of times. He has learned to read the roiling water in 
front of him and to anticipate obstacles. He has learned to make the tiny 
adjustments of posture that keep him upright. There are fewer 
opportunities for young men to learn how to create a giant company, and 
fewer chances to avoid hidden rocks—such as a brilliant innovation by a 
competing firm. Of course there was a great deal of skill in the Google 
story, but luck played a more important role in the actual event than it does 
in the telling of it. And the more luck was involved, the less there is to be 
learned. 

At work here is that powerful WY SIATI rule. \bu cannot help dealing with 
the limited information you have as if it were all there is to know. \bu build 
the best possible story from the information available to you, and if it is a 
good story, you believe it. Paradoxically, it is easier to construct a coherent 
story when you know little, when there are fewer pieces to fit into the puzzle. 
Our comforting conviction that the world makes sense rests on a secure 
foundation: our almost unlimited ability to ignore our ignorance. 

I have heard of too many people who “knew well before it happened that 
the 2008 financial crisis was inevitable.” This sentence contains a highly 
objectionable word, which should be removed from our vocabulary in 
discussions of major events. The word is, of course, knew. Some people 
thought well in advance that there would be a crisis, but they did not know 
it. They now say they knew it because the crisis did in fact happen. This is 
a misuse of an important concept. In everyday language, we apply the 
word knowonly when what was known is true and can be shown to be true. 
We can know something only if it is both true and knowable. But the people 
who thought there would be a crisis (and there are fewer of them than now 
remember thinking it) could not conclusively show it at the time. Many 



intelligent and well-informed people were keenly interested in the future of 
the economy and did not believe a catastrophe was imminent; I infer from 
this fact that the crisis was not knowable. What is perverse about the use 
of know'm this context is not that some individuals get credit for prescience 
that they do not deserve. It is that the language implies that the world is 
more knowable than it is. It helps perpetuate a pernicious illusion. 

The core of the illusion is that we believe we understand the past, which 
implies that the future also should be knowable, but in fact we understand 
the past less than we believe we do. Know is not the only word that fosters 
this illusion. In common usage, the words intuition and premonition also 
are reserved for past thoughts that turned out to be true. The statement “I 
had a premonition that the marriage would not last, but I was wrong” 
sounds odd, as does any sentence about an intuition that turned out to be 
false. To think clearly about the future, we need to clean up the language 
that we use in labeling the beliefs we had in the past. 

The Social Costs of Hindsight 

The mind that makes up narratives about the past is a sense-making 
organ. When an unpredicted event occurs, we immediately adjust our view 
of the world to accommodate the surprise. Imagine yourself before a 
football game between two teams that have the same record of wins and 
losses. Now the game is over, and one team trashed the other. In your 
revised model of the world, the winning team is much stronger than the 
loser, and your view of the past as well as of the future has been altered be 
fpy that new perception. Learning from surprises is a reasonable thing to 
do, but it can have some dangerous consequences. 

A general limitation of the human mind is its imperfect ability to 
reconstruct past states of knowledge, or beliefs that have changed. Once 
you adopt a new view of the world (or of any part of it), you immediately 
lose much of your ability to recall what you used to believe before your 
mind changed. 

Many psychologists have studied what happens when people change 
their minds. Choosing a topic on which minds are not completely made up 
—say, the death penalty—the experimenter carefully measures people’s 
attitudes. Next, the participants see or hear a persuasive pro or con 
message. Then the experimenter measures people’s attitudes again; they 
usually are closer to the persuasive message they were exposed to. 
Finally, the participants report the opinion they held beforehand. This task 
turns out to be surprisingly difficult. Asked to reconstruct their former 
beliefs, people retrieve their current ones instead—an instance of 



substitution—and many cannot believe that they ever felt differently. 

"four inability to reconstruct past beliefs will inevitably cause you to 
underestimate the extent to which you were surprised by past events. 
Baruch Fischh off first demonstrated this “l-knew-it-all-along” effect, or 
hindsight bias, when he was a student in Jerusalem. Together with Ruth 
Beyth (another of our students), Fischh off conducted a survey before 
President Richard Nixon visited China and Russia in 1972. The 
respondents assigned probabilities to fifteen possible outcomes of 
Nixon’s diplomatic initiatives. Would Mao Zedong agree to meet with 
Nixon? Might the United States grant diplomatic recognition to China? 
After decades of enmity, could the United States and the Soviet Union 
agree on anything significant? 

After Nixon’s return from his travels, Fischh off and Beyth asked the 
same people to recall the probability that they had originally assigned to 
each of the fifteen possible outcomes. The results were clear. If an event 
had actually occurred, people exaggerated the probability that they had 
assigned to it earlier. If the possible event had not come to pass, the 
participants erroneously recalled that they had always considered it 
unlikely. Further experiments showed that people were driven to overstate 
the accuracy not only of their original predictions but also of those made by 
others. Similar results have been found for other events that gripped public 
attention, such as the O. J. Simpson murder trial and the impeachment of 
President Bill Clinton. The tendency to revise the history of one’s beliefs in 
light of what actually happened produces a robust cognitive illusion. 

Hindsight bias has pernicious effects on the evaluations of decision 
makers. It leads observers to assess the quality of a decision not by 
whether the process was sound but by whether its outcome was good or 
bad. Consider a low-risk surgical intervention in which an unpredictable 
accident occurred that caused the patient’s death. The jury will be prone to 
believe, after the fact, that the operation was actually risky and that the 
doctor who ordered it should have known better. This outcome bias makes 
it almost impossible to evaluate a decision properly—in terms of the 
beliefs that were reasonable when the decision was made. 

Hindsight is especially unkind to decision makers who act as agents for 
others—physicians, financial advisers, third-base coaches, CEOs, social 
workers, diplomats, politicians. We are prone to blame decision makers 
for good decisions that worked out badly and to give them too little credit 
for successful movesecap that appear obvious only after the fact. There is 
a clear outcome bias. When the outcomes are bad, the clients often blame 
their agents for not seeing the handwriting on the wall—forgetting that it 
was written in invisible ink that became legible only afterward. Actions that 



seemed prudent in foresight can look irresponsibly negligent in hindsight. 
Based on an actual legal case, students in California were asked whether 
the city of Duluth, Minnesota, should have shouldered the considerable 
cost of hiring a full-time bridge monitor to protect against the risk that 
debris might get caught and block the free flow of water. One group was 
shown only the evidence available at the time of the city’s decision; 24% of 
these people felt that Duluth should take on the expense of hiring a flood 
monitor. The second group was informed that debris had blocked the river, 
causing major flood damage; 56% of these people said the city should 
have hired the monitor, although they had been explicitly instructed not to 
let hindsight distort their judgment. 

The worse the consequence, the greater the hindsight bias. In the case 
of a catastrophe, such as 9/11, we are especially ready to believe that the 
officials who failed to anticipate it were negligent or blind. On July 10, 
2001, the Central Intelligence Agency obtained information that al-Qaeda 
might be planning a major attack against the United States. George Tenet, 
director of the CIA, brought the information not to President George W. 
Bush but to National Security Adviser Condoleezza Rice. When the facts 
later emerged, Ben Bradlee, the legendary executive editor of The 
Washington Post, declared, “It seems to me elementary that if you’ve got 
the story that’s going to dominate history you might as well go right to the 
president.” But on July 10, no one knew—or could have known—that this 
tidbit of intelligence would turn out to dominate history. 

Because adherence to standard operating procedures is difficult to 
second-guess, decision makers who expect to have their decisions 
scrutinized with hindsight are driven to bureaucratic solutions—and to an 
extreme reluctance to take risks. As malpractice litigation became more 
common, physicians changed their procedures in multiple ways: ordered 
more tests, referred more cases to specialists, applied conventional 
treatments even when they were unlikely to help. These actions protected 
the physicians more than they benefited the patients, creating the potential 
for conflicts of interest. Increased accountability is a mixed blessing. 

Although hindsight and the outcome bias generally foster risk aversion, 
they also bring undeserved rewards to irresponsible risk seekers, such as 
a general or an entrepreneur who took a crazy gamble and won. Leaders 
who have been lucky are never punished for having taken too much risk. 
Instead, they are believed to have had the flair and foresight to anticipate 
success, and the sensible people who doubted them are seen in hindsight 
as mediocre, timid, and weak. A few lucky gambles can crown a reckless 
leader with a halo of prescience and boldness. 



Recipes for Success 


The sense-making machinery of System 1 makes us see the world as 
more tidy, simple, predictable, and coherent than it really is. The illusion 
that one has understood the past feeds the further illusion that one can 
predict and control the future. These illusions are comforting. They reduce 
the anxiety that we would experience if we allowed ourselves to fully 
acknowledge the uncertainties of existence. We all have a need for the 
reassuring message that actions have appropriate consequences, and 
that success will reward wisdom and courage. Many bdecpusiness books 
are tailor-made to satisfy this need. 

Do leaders and management practices influence the outcomes of firms 
in the market? Of course they do, and the effects have been confirmed by 
systematic research that objectively assessed the characteristics of CEOs 
and their decisions, and related them to subsequent outcomes of the firm. 
In one study, the CEOs were characterized by the strategy of the 
companies they had led before their current appointment, as well as by 
management rules and procedures adopted after their appointment. CEOs 
do influence performance, but the effects are much smaller than a reading 
of the business press suggests. 

Researchers measure the strength of relationships by a correlation 
coefficient, which varies between 0 and 1. The coefficient was defined 
earlier (in relation to regression to the mean) by the extent to which two 
measures are determined by shared factors. A very generous estimate of 
the correlation between the success of the firm and the quality of its CEO 
might be as high as .30, indicating 30% overlap. To appreciate the 
significance of this number, consider the following question: 

Suppose you consider many pairs of firms. The two firms in each 
pair are generally similar, but the CEO of one of them is better 
than the other. How often will you find that the firm with the 
stronger CEO is the more successful of the two? 

In a well-ordered and predictable world, the correlation would be perfect 
(1), and the stronger CEO would be found to lead the more successful firm 
in 100% of the pairs. If the relative success of similar firms was determined 
entirely by factors that the CEO does not control (call them luck, if you 
wish), you would find the more successful firm led by the weaker CEO 50% 
of the time. A correlation of .30 implies that you would find the stronger 
CEO leading the stronger firm in about 60% of the pairs—an improvement 
of a mere 10 percentage points over random guessing, hardly grist for the 



hero worship of CEOs we so often witness. 

If you expected this value to be higher—and most of us do—then you 
should take that as an indication that you are prone to overestimate the 
predictability of the world you live in. Make no mistake: improving the odds 
of success from 1:1 to 3:2 is a very significant advantage, both at the 
racetrack and in business. From the perspective of most business writers, 
however, a CEO who has so little control over performance would not be 
particularly impressive even if her firm did well. It is difficult to imagine 
people lining up at airport bookstores to buy a book that enthusiastically 
describes the practices of business leaders who, on average, do 
somewhat better than chance. Consumers have a hunger for a clear 
message about the determinants of success and failure in business, and 
they need stories that offer a sense of understanding, however illusory. 

In his penetrating book The Halo Effect, Philip Rosenzweig, a business 
school professor based in Switzerland, shows how the demand for illusory 
certainty is met in two popular genres of business writing: histories of the 
rise (usually) and fall (occasionally) of particular individuals and 
companies, and analyses of differences between successful and less 
successful firms. He concludes that stories of success and failure 
consistently exaggerate the impact of leadership style and management 
practices on firm outcomes, and thus their message is rarely useful. 

To appreciate what is going on, imagine that business experts, such as 
other CEOs, are asked to comment on the reputation of the chief executive 
of a company. They popare keenly aware of whether the company has 
recently been thriving or failing. As we saw earlier in the case of Google, 
this knowledge generates a halo. The CEO of a successful company is 
likely to be called flexible, methodical, and decisive. Imagine that a year 
has passed and things have gone sour. The same executive is now 
described as confused, rigid, and authoritarian. Both descriptions sound 
right at the time: it seems almost absurd to call a successful leader rigid 
and confused, ora struggling leader flexible and methodical. 

Indeed, the halo effect is so powerful that you probably find yourself 
resisting the idea that the same person and the same behaviors appear 
methodical when things are going well and rigid when things are going 
poorly. Because of the halo effect, we get the causal relationship 
backward: we are prone to believe that the firm fails because its CEO is 
rigid, when the truth is that the CEO appears to be rigid because the firm is 
failing. This is how illusions of understanding are born. 

The halo effect and outcome bias combine to explain the extraordinary 
appeal of books that seek to draw operational morals from systematic 
examination of successful businesses. One of the best-known examples of 



this genre is Jim Collins and Jerry I. Porras’s Built to Last. The book 
contains a thorough analysis of eighteen pairs of competing companies, in 
which one was more successful than the other. The data for these 
comparisons are ratings of various aspects of corporate culture, strategy, 
and management practices. “We believe every CEO, manager, and 
entrepreneur in the world should read this book,” the authors proclaim. 
“You can build a visionary company.” 

The basic message of Built to Last and other similar books is that good 
managerial practices can be identified and that good practices will be 
rewarded by good results. Both messages are overstated. The 
comparison of firms that have been more or less successful is to a 
significant extent a comparison between firms that have been more or less 
lucky. Knowing the importance of luck, you should be particularly 
suspicious when highly consistent patterns emerge from the comparison of 
successful and less successful firms. In the presence of randomness, 
regular patterns can only be mirages. 

Because luck plays a large role, the quality of leadership and 
management practices cannot be inferred reliably from observations of 
success. And even if you had perfect foreknowledge that a CEO has 
brilliant vision and extraordinary competence, you still would be unable to 
predict how the company will perform with much better accuracy than the 
flip of a coin. On average, the gap in corporate profitability and stock 
returns between the outstanding firms and the less successful firms studied 
in Built to Last shrank to almost nothing in the period following the study. 
The average profitability of the companies identified in the famous In 
Search of Excellence dropped sharply as well within a short time. A study 
of Fortune's “Most Admired Companies” finds that over a twenty-year 
period, the firms with the worst ratings went on to earn much higher stock 
returns than the most admired firms. 

\bu are probably tempted to think of causal explanations for these 
observations: perhaps the successful firms became complacent, the less 
successful firms tried harder. But this is the wrong way to think about what 
happened. The average gap must shrink, because the original gap was 
due in good part to luck, which contributed both to the success of the top 
firms and to the lagging performance of the rest. We have already 
encountered this statistical fact of life: regression to the mean. 

Stories of how businesses rise and fall strike a chord with readers by 
offering what the human mind needs: a simple message of triumph and 
failure that identifies clear causes and ignores the determinative power of 
luck and the inevitability of regression. These stories induce and maintain 
an illusion of understanding, imparting lessons of little enduring value to 



readers who are all too eager to believe them. 


Speaking of Hindsight 


“The mistake appears obvious, but it is just hindsight. You could 
not have known in advance.” 


“He’s learning too much from this success story, which is too tidy. 
He has fallen for a narrative fallacy.” 


“She has no evidence for saying that the firm is badly managed. 
All she knows is that its stock has gone down. This is an outcome 
bias, part hindsight and part halo effect.” 


“Let’s not fall for the outcome bias. This was a stupid decision 
even though it worked out well.” 



The Illusion of Validity 


System 1 is designed to jump to conclusions from little evidence—and it is 
not designed to know the size of its jumps. Because of WYSIATI, only the 
evidence at hand counts. Because of confidence by coherence, the 
subjective confidence we have in our opinions reflects the coherence of the 
story that System 1 and System 2 have constructed. The amount of 
evidence and its quality do not count for much, because poor evidence can 
make a very good story. For some of our most important beliefs we have 
no evidence at all, except that people we love and trust hold these beliefs. 
Considering how little we know, the confidence we have in our beliefs is 
preposterous—and it is also essential. 

The Illusion of Validity 

Many decades ago I spent what seemed like a great deal of time under a 
scorching sun, watching groups of sweaty soldiers as they solved a 
problem. I was doing my national service in the Israeli Army at the time. I 
had completed an undergraduate degree in psychology, and after a year 
as an infantry officer was assigned to the army’s Psychology Branch, 
where one of my occasional duties was to help evaluate candidates for 
officer training. We used methods that had been developed by the British 
Army in World War II. 

One test, called the “leaderless group challenge,” was conducted on an 
obstacle field. Eight candidates, strangers to each other, with all insignia of 
rank removed and only numbered tags to identify them, were instructed to 
lift a long log from the ground and haul it to a wall about six feet high. The 
entire group had to get to the other side of the wall without the log touching 
either the ground or the wall, and without anyone touching the wall. If any of 
these things happened, they had to declare itsigpfb T and start again. 

There was more than one way to solve the problem. A common solution 
was for the team to send several men to the other side by crawling over the 
pole as it was held at an angle, like a giant fishing rod, by other members 
of the group. Or else some soldiers would climb onto someone’s shoulders 
and jump across. The last man would then have to jump up at the pole, held 
up at an angle by the rest of the group, shinny his way along its length as 
the others kept him and the pole suspended in the air, and leap safely to 
the other side. Failure was common at this point, which required them to 
start all over again. 

As a colleague and I monitored the exercise, we made note of who took 
charge, who tried to lead but was rebuffed, how cooperative each soldier 



was in contributing to the group effort. We saw who seemed to be 
stubborn, submissive, arrogant, patient, hot-tempered, persistent, or a 
quitter. We sometimes saw competitive spite when someone whose idea 
had been rejected by the group no longer worked very hard. And we saw 
reactions to crisis: who berated a comrade whose mistake had caused the 
whole group to fail, who stepped forward to lead when the exhausted team 
had to start over. Under the stress of the event, we felt, each man’s true 
nature revealed itself. Our impression of each candidate’s character was 
as direct and compelling as the color of the sky. 

After watching the candidates make several attempts, we had to 
summarize our impressions of soldiers’ leadership abilities and 
determine, with a numerical score, who should be eligible for officer 
training. We spent some time discussing each case and reviewing our 
impressions. The task was not difficult, because we felt we had already 
seen each soldier’s leadership skills. Some of the men had looked like 
strong leaders, others had seemed like wimps or arrogant fools, others 
mediocre but not hopeless. Quite a few looked so weak that we ruled them 
out as candidates for officer rank. When our multiple observations of each 
candidate con
verged on a coherent story, we were completely confident in 
our evaluations and felt that what we had seen pointed directly to the future. 
The soldier who took over when the group was in trouble and led the team 
over the wall was a leader at that moment. The obvious best guess about 
how he would do in training, or in combat, was that he would be as 
effective then as he had been at the wall. Any other prediction seemed 
inconsistent with the evidence before our eyes. 

Because our impressions of how well each soldier had performed were 
generally coherent and clear, our formal predictions were just as definite. A 
single score usually came to mind and we rarely experienced doubts or 
formed conflicting impressions. We were quite willing to declare, “This one 
will never make it,” “That fellow is mediocre, but he should do okay,” or “He 
will be a star.” We felt no need to question our forecasts, moderate them, 
or equivocate. If challenged, however, we were prepared to admit, “But of 
course anything could happen.” We were willing to make that admission 
because, despite our definite impressions about individual candidates, we 
knew with certainty that our forecasts were largely useless. 

The evidence that we could not forecast success accurately was 
overwhelming. Every few months we had a feedback session in which we 
learned how the cadets were doing at the officer-training school and could 
compare our assessments against the opinions of commanders who had 
been monitoring them for some time. The story was always the same: our 
ability to predict performance at the school was negligible. Our forecasts 
were better than blind guesses, but not by much. 



We weed ®re downcast for a while after receiving the discouraging 
news. But this was the army. Useful or not, there was a routine to be 
followed and orders to be obeyed. Another batch of candidates arrived the 
next day. We took them to the obstacle field, we faced them with the wall, 
they lifted the log, and within a few minutes we saw their true natures 
revealed, as clearly as before. The dismal truth about the quality of our 
predictions had no effect whatsoever on how we evaluated candidates and 
very little effect on the confidence we felt in our judgments and predictions 
about individuals. 

What happened was remarkable. The global evidence of our previous 
failure should have shaken our confidence in our judgments of the 
candidates, but it did not. It should also have caused us to moderate our 
predictions, but it did not. We knew as a general fact that our predictions 
were little better than random guesses, but we continued to feel and act as 
if each of our specific predictions was valid. I was reminded of the Muller- 
Lyer illusion, in which we know the lines are of equal length yet still see 
them as being different. I was so struck by the analogy that I coined a term 
for our experience: the illusion of validity. 

I had discovered my first cognitive illusion. 


Decades later, I can see many of the central themes of my thinking—and of 
this book—in that old story. Our expectations for the soldiers’ future 
performance were a clear instance of substitution, and of the 
representativeness heuristic in particular. Having observed one hour of a 
soldier’s behavior in an artificial situation, we felt we knew how well he 
would face the challenges of officer training and of leadership in combat. 
Our predictions were completely nonregressive—we had no reservations 
about predicting failure or outstanding success from weak evidence. This 
was a clear instance of WYSIATI. We had compelling impressions of the 
behavior we observed and no good way to represent our ignorance of the 
factors that would eventually determine how well the candidate would 
perform as an officer. 

Looking back, the most striking part of the story is that our knowledge of 
the general rule—that we could not predict—had no effect on our 
confidence in individual cases. I can see now that our reaction was similar 
to that of Nisbett and Borgida’s students when they were told that most 
people did not help a stranger suffering a seizure. They certainly believed 
the statistics they were shown, but the base rates did not influence their 
judgment of whether an individual they saw on the video would or would not 
help a stranger. Just as Nisbett and Borgida showed, people are often 



reluctant to infer the particular from the general. 

Subjective confidence in a judgment is not a reasoned evaluation of the 
probability that this judgment is correct. Confidence is a feeling, which 
reflects the coherence of the information and the cognitive ease of 
processing it. It is wise to take admissions of uncertainty seriously, but 
declarations of high confidence mainly tell you that an individual has 
constructed a coherent story in his mind, not necessarily that the story is 
true. 


The Illusion of Stock-Picking Skill 

In 1984, Amos and I and our friend Richard Thaler visited a Wall Street 
firm. Our host, a senior investment manager, had invited us to discuss the 
role of judgment biases in investing. I knew so little about finance that I did 
not even know what to ask him, but I remember one exchange. “When you 
sell a stock,” d n® I asked, “who buys it?” He answered with a wave in the 
vague direction of the window, indicating that he expected the buyer to be 
someone else very much like him. That was odd: What made one person 
buy and the other sell? What did the sellers think they knew that the buyers 
did not? 

Since then, my questions about the stock market have hardened into a 
larger puzzle: a major industry appears to be built largely on an illusion of 
skill. Billions of shares are traded every day, with many people buying 
each stock and others selling it to them. It is not unusual for more than 100 
million shares of a single stock to change hands in one day. Most of the 
buyers and sellers know that they have the same information; they 
exchange the stocks primarily because they have different opinions. The 
buyers think the price is too low and likely to rise, while the sellers think the 
price is high and likely to drop. The puzzle is why buyers and sellers alike 
think that the current price is wrong. What makes them believe they know 
more about what the price should be than the market does? For most of 
them, that belief is an illusion. 

In its broad outlines, the standard theory of how the stock market works 
is accepted by all the participants in the industry. Everybody in the 
investment business has read Burton Malkiel’s wonderful book A Random 
Walk Dow 7 Wall Street. Malkiel’s central idea is that a stock’s price 
incorporates all the available knowledge about the value of the company 
and the best predictions about the future of the stock. If some people 
believe that the price of a stock will be higher tomorrow, they will buy more 
of it today. This, in turn, will cause its price to rise. If all assets in a market 
are correctly priced, no one can expect either to gain or to lose by trading. 



Perfect prices leave no scope for cleverness, but they also protect fools 
from their own folly. We now know, however, that the theory is not quite 
right. Many individual investors lose consistently by trading, an 
achievement that a dart-throwing chimp could not match. The first 
demonstration of this startling conclusion was collected by Terry Odean, a 
finance professor at UC Berkeley who was once my student. 

Odean began by studying the trading records of 10,000 brokerage 
accounts of individual investors spanning a seven-year period. He was 
able to analyze every transaction the investors executed through that firm, 
nearly 163,000 trades. This rich set of data allowed Odean to identify all 
instances in which an investor sold some of his holdings in one stock and 
soon afterward bought another stock. By these actions the investor 
revealed that he (most of the investors were men) had a definite idea 
about the future of the two stocks: he expected the stock that he chose to 
buy to do better than the stock he chose to sell. 

To determine whether those ideas were well founded, Odean compared 
the returns of the stock the investor had sold and the stock he had bought 
in its place, over the course of one year after the transaction. The results 
were unequivocally bad. On average, the shares that individual traders 
sold did better than those they bought, by a very substantial margin: 3.2 
percentage points per year, above and beyond the significant costs of 
executing the two trades. 

It is important to remember that this is a statement about averages: 
some individuals did much better, others did much worse. However, it is 
clear that for the large majority of individual investors, taking a shower and 
doing nothing would have been a better policy than implementing the ideas 
that came to their minds. Later research by Odean and his colleague Brad 
Barber supported this conclusion. In a paper titled “Trading Is Hazardous 
to Yourt-t* Wealth,” they showed that, on average, the most active traders 
had the poorest results, while the investors who traded the least earned the 
highest returns. In another paper, titled “Boys Will Be Boys,” they showed 
that men acted on their useless ideas significantly more often than women, 
and that as a result women achieved better investment results than men. 

Of course, there is always someone on the other side of each 
transaction; in general, these are financial institutions and professional 
investors, who are ready to take advantage of the mistakes that individual 
traders make in choosing a stock to sell and another stock to buy. Further 
research by Barber and Odean has shed light on these mistakes. 
Individual investors like to lock in their gains by selling “winners,” stocks 
that have appreciated since they were purchased, and they hang on to 
their losers. Unfortunately for them, recent winners tend to do better than 
recent losers in the short run, so individuals sell the wrong stocks. They 



also buy the wrong stocks. Individual investors predictably flock to 
companies that draw their attention because they are in the news. 
Professional investors are more selective in responding to news. These 
findings provide some justification for the label of “smart money” that 
finance professionals apply to themselves. 

Although professionals are able to extract a considerable amount of 
wealth from amateurs, few stock pickers, if any, have the skill needed to 
beat the market consistently, year after year. Professional investors, 
including fund managers, fail a basic test of skill: persistent achievement. 
The diagnostic for the existence of any skill is the consistency of individual 
differences in achievement. The logic is simple: if individual differences in 
any one year are due entirely to luck, the ranking of investors and funds will 
vary erratically and the year-to-year correlation will be zero. Where there is 
skill, however, the rankings will be more stable. The persistence of 
individual differences is the measure by which we confirm the existence of 
skill among golfers, car salespeople, orthodontists, or speedy toll 
collectors on the turnpike. 

Mutual funds are run by highly experienced and hardworking 
professionals who buy and sell stocks to achieve the best possible results 
for their clients. Nevertheless, the evidence from more than fifty years of 
research is conclusive: fora large majority of fund managers, the selection 
of stocks is more like rolling dice than like playing poker. Typically at least 
two out of every three mutual funds underperform the overall market in any 
given year. 

More important, the year-to-year correlation between the outcomes of 
mutual funds is very small, barely higher than zero. The successful funds in 
any given year are mostly lucky; they have a good roll of the dice. There is 
general agreement among researchers that nearly all stock pickers, 
whether they know it or not—and few of them do—are playing a game of 
chance. The subjective experience of traders is that they are making 
sensible educated guesses in a situation of great uncertainty. In highly 
efficient markets, however, educated guesses are no more accurate than 
blind guesses. 


Some years ago I had an unusual opportunity to examine the illusion of 
financial skill up close. I had been invited to speak to a group of investment 
advisers in a firm that provided financial advice and other services to very 
wealthy clients. I asked for some data to prepare my presentation and was 
granted a small treasure: a spreadsheet summarizing the investment 
outcomes of some twenty-five anonymous wealth advisers, for each of 



eight consecutive years. Each adviser’s scoof ®re for each year was his 
(most of them were men) main determinant of his year-end bonus. It was a 
simple matter to rank the advisers by their performance in each year and 
to determine whether there were persistent differences in skill among them 
and whether the same advisers consistently achieved better returns for 
their clients year after year. 

To answer the question, I computed correlation coefficients between the 
rankings in each pair of years: year 1 with year 2, year 1 with year 3, and 
so on up through year 7 with year 8. That yielded 28 correlation 
coefficients, one for each pair of years. I knew the theory and was 
prepared to find weak evidence of persistence of skill. Still, I was surprised 
to find that the average of the 28 correlations was .01. In other words, zero. 
The consistent correlations that would indicate differences in skill were not 
to be found. The results resembled what you would expect from a dice¬ 
rolling contest, not a game of skill. 

No one in the firm seemed to be aware of the nature of the game that its 
stock pickers were playing. The advisers themselves felt they were 
competent professionals doing a serious job, and their superiors agreed. 
On the evening before the seminar, Richard Thaler and I had dinner with 
some of the top executives of the firm, the people who decide on the size 
of bonuses. We asked them to guess the year-to-year correlation in the 
rankings of individual advisers. They thought they knew what was coming 
and smiled as they said “not very high” or “performance certainly 
fluctuates.” It quickly became clear, however, that no one expected the 
average correlation to be zero. 

Our message to the executives was that, at least when it came to 
building portfolios, the firm was rewarding luck as if it were skill. This 
should have been shocking news to them, but it was not. There was no 
sign that they disbelieved us. How could they? After all, we had analyzed 
their own results, and they were sophisticated enough to see the 
implications, which we politely refrained from spelling out. We all went on 
calmly with our dinner, and I have no doubt that both our findings and their 
implications were quickly swept under the rug and that life in the firm went 
on just as before. The illusion of skill is not only an individual aberration; it 
is deeply ingrained in the culture of the industry. Facts that challenge such 
basic assumptions—and thereby threaten people’s livelihood and self¬ 
esteem—are simply not absorbed. The mind does not digest them. This is 
particularly true of statistical studies of performance, which provide base- 
rate information that people generally ignore when it clashes with their 
personal impressions from experience. 

The next morning, we reported the findings to the advisers, and their 
response was equally bland. Their own experience of exercising careful 



judgment on complex problems was far more compelling to them than an 
obscure statistical fact. When we were done, one of the executives I had 
dined with the previous evening drove me to the airport. He told me, with a 
trace of defensiveness, “I have done very well for the firm and no one can 
take that away from me.” I smiled and said nothing. But I thought, “Well, I 
took it away from you this morning. If your success was due mostly to 
chance, how much credit are you entitled to take for it?” 

What Supports the Illusions of Skill and Validity? 

Cognitive illusions can be more stubborn than visual illusions. What you 
learned about the Muller-Lyer illusion did not change the way you see the 
lines, but it changed your behavior. You now know that you cannot trust your 
impression of the lenglli®th of lines that have fins appended to them, and 
you also know that in the standard Muller-Lyer display you cannot trust what 
you see. When asked about the length of the lines, you will report your 
informed belief, not the illusion that you continue to see. In contrast, when 
my colleagues and I in the army learned that our leadership assessment 
tests had low validity, we accepted that fact intellectually, but it had no 
impact on either our feelings or our subsequent actions. The response we 
encountered in the financial firm was even more extreme. I am convinced 
that the message that Thaler and I delivered to both the executives and the 
portfolio managers was instantly put away in a dark comer of memory 
where it would cause no damage. 

Why do investors, both amateur and professional, stubbornly believe that 
they can do better than the market, contrary to an economic theory that 
most of them accept, and contrary to what they could learn from a 
dispassionate evaluation of their personal experience? Many of the 
themes of previous chapters come up again in the explanation of the 
prevalence and persistence of an illusion of skill in the financial world. 

The most potent psychological cause of the illusion is certainly that the 
people who pick stocks are exercising high-level skills. They consult 
economic data and forecasts, they examine income statements and 
balance sheets, they evaluate the quality of top management, and they 
assess the competition. All this is serious work that requires extensive 
training, and the people who do it have the immediate (and valid) 
experience of using these skills. Unfortunately, skill in evaluating the 
business prospects of a firm is not sufficient for successful stock trading, 
where the key question is whether the information about the firm is already 
incorporated in the price of its stock. Traders apparently lack the skill to 
answer this crucial question, but they appear to be ignorant of their 



ignorance. As I had discovered from watching cadets on the obstacle field, 
subjective confidence of traders is a feeling, not a judgment. Our 
understanding of cognitive ease and associative coherence locates 
subjective confidence firmly in System 1. 

Finally, the illusions of validity and skill are supported by a powerful 
professional culture. We know that people can maintain an unshakable 
faith in any proposition, however absurd, when they are sustained by a 
community of like-minded believers. Given the professional culture of the 
financial community, it is not surprising that large numbers of individuals in 
that world believe themselves to be among the chosen few who can do 
what they believe others cannot. 

The Illusions of Pundits 

The idea that the future is unpredictable is undermined every day by the 
ease with which the past is explained. As Nassim Taleb pointed out in The 
Black Sv\an, our tendency to construct and believe coherent narratives of 
the past makes it difficult for us to accept the limits of our forecasting 
ability. Everything makes sense in hindsight, a fact that financial pundits 
exploit every evening as they offer convincing accounts of the day’s events. 
And we cannot suppress the powerful intuition that what makes sense in 
hindsight today was predictable yesterday. The illusion that we understand 
the past fosters overconfidence in our ability to predict the future. 

The often-used image of the “march of history” implies order and 
direction. Marches, unlike strolls or walks, are not random. We think that 
we should be able to explain the past by focusing on either large social 
movements and cultural and technological developments or the intentions 
and abilities of a few g co® reat men. The idea that large historical events 
are determined by luck is profoundly shocking, although it is demonstrably 
true. It is hard to think of the history of the twentieth century, including its 
large social movements, without bringing in the role of Hitler, Stalin, and 
Mao Zedong. But there was a moment in time, just before an egg was 
fertilized, when there was a fifty-fifty chance that the embryo that became 
Hitler could have been a female. Compounding the three events, there was 
a probability of one-eighth of a twentieth century without any of the three 
great villains and it is impossible to argue that history would have been 
roughly the same in their absence. The fertilization of these three eggs had 
momentous consequences, and it makes a joke of the idea that long-term 
developments are predictable. 

Yei the illusion of valid prediction remains intact, a fact that is exploited 
by people whose business is prediction—not only financial experts but 



pundits in business and politics, too. Television and radio stations and 
newspapers have their panels of experts whose job it is to comment on the 
recent past and foretell the future. Viewers and readers have the 
impression that they are receiving information that is somehow privileged, 
or at least extremely insightful. And there is no doubt that the pundits and 
their promoters genuinely believe they are offering such information. Philip 
Tetlock, a psychologist at the University of Pennsylvania, explained these 
so-called expert predictions in a landmark twenty-year study, which he 
published in his 2005 book Expert Political Judgment: How Good Is It? 
HowCan We KnoW? Tetlock has set the terms for any future discussion of 
this topic. 

Tetlock interviewed 284 people who made their living “commenting or 
offering advice on political and economic trends.” He asked them to 
assess the probabilities that certain events would occur in the not too 
distant future, both in areas of the world in which they specialized and in 
regions about which they had less knowledge. Would Gorbachev be 
ousted in a coup? Would the United States go to war in the Persian Gulf? 
Which country would become the next big emerging market? In all, Tetlock 
gathered more than 80,000 predictions. He also asked the experts how 
they reached their conclusions, how they reacted when proved wrong, and 
how they evaluated evidence that did not support their positions. 
Respondents were asked to rate the probabilities of three alternative 
outcomes in every case: the persistence of the status quo, more of 
something such as political freedom or economic growth, or less of that 
thing. 

The results were devastating. The experts performed worse than they 
would have if they had simply assigned equal probabilities to each of the 
three potential outcomes. In other words, people who spend their time, and 
earn their living, studying a particular topic produce poorer predictions than 
dart-throwing monkeys who would have distributed their choices evenly 
over the options. Even in the region they knew best, experts were not 
significantly better than nonspecialists. 

Those who know more forecast very slightly better than those who know 
less. But those with the most knowledge are often less reliable. The reason 
is that the person who acquires more knowledge develops an enhanced 
illusion of her skill and becomes unrealistically overconfident. “We reach 
the point of diminishing marginal predictive returns for knowledge 
disconcertingly quickly,” Tetlock writes. “In this age of academic 
hyperspecialization, there is no reason for supposing that contributors to 
top journals—distinguished political scientists, area study specialists, 
economists, and so on—are any better than journalists or attentive readers 



of The New York Times in l reading&amp;#ouP8217; emerging situations.” 
The more famous the forecaster, Tetlock discovered, the more flamboyant 
the forecasts. “Experts in demand,” he writes, “were more overconfident 
than their colleagues who eked out existences far from the limelight.” 

Tetlock also found that experts resisted admitting that they had been 
wrong, and when they were compelled to admit error, they had a large 
collection of excuses: they had been wrong only in their timing, an 
unforeseeable event had intervened, or they had been wrong but for the 
right reasons. Experts are just human in the end. They are dazzled by their 
own brilliance and hate to be wrong. Experts are led astray not by what 
they believe, but by how they think, says Tetlock. He uses the terminology 
from Isaiah Berlin’s essay on Tolstoy, “The Hedgehog and the Fox.” 
Hedgehogs “know one big thing” and have a theory about the world; they 
account for particular events within a coherent framework, bristle with 
impatience toward those who don’t see things their way, and are confident 
in their forecasts. They are also especially reluctant to admit error. For 
hedgehogs, a failed prediction is almost always “off only on timing” or “very 
nearly right.” They are opinionated and clear, which is exactly what 
television producers love to see on programs. Two hedgehogs on different 
sides of an issue, each attacking the idiotic ideas of the adversary, make 
for a good show. 

Foxes, by contrast, are complex thinkers. They don’t believe that one big 
thing drives the march of history (for example, they are unlikely to accept 
the view that Ronald Reagan single-handedly ended the cold war by 
standing tall against the Soviet Union). Instead the foxes recognize that 
reality emerges from the interactions of many different agents and forces, 
including blind luck, often producing large and unpredictable outcomes. It 
was the foxes who scored best in Tetlock’s study, although their 
performance was still very poor. They are less likely than hedgehogs to be 
invited to participate in television debates. 

It is Not the Experts’ Fault—The World is Difficult 

The main point of this chapter is not that people who attempt to predict the 
future make many errors; that goes without saying. The first lesson is that 
errors of prediction are inevitable because the world is unpredictable. The 
second is that high subjective confidence is not to be trusted as an 
indicator of accuracy (low confidence could be more informative). 

Short-term trends can be forecast, and behavior and achievements can 
be predicted with fair accuracy from previous behaviors and 
achievements. But we should not expect performance in officer training 



and in combat to be predictable from behavior on an obstacle field— 
behavior both on the test and in the real world is determined by many 
factors that are specific to the particular situation. Remove one highly 
assertive member from a group of eight candidates and everyone else’s 
personalities will appear to change. Let a sniper’s bullet move by a few 
centimeters and the performance of an officer will be transformed. I do not 
deny the validity of all tests—if a test predicts an important outcome with a 
validity of .20 or .30, the test should be used. But you should not expect 
more. You should expect little or nothing from Wall Street stock pickers 
who hope to be more accurate than the market in predicting the future of 
prices. And you should not expect much from pundits making long-term 
forecasts—although they may have valuable insights into the near future. 
The line that separates the possibly predictable future from the 
unpredictable distant future is in® yet to be drawn. 

Speaking of Illusory Skill 


“He knows that the record indicates that the development of this 
illness is mostly unpredictable. How can he be so confident in this 
case? Sounds like an illusion of validity.” 


“She has a coherent story that explains all she knows, and the 
coherence makes her feel good.” 


“What makes him believe that he is smarter than the market? Is 
this an illusion of skill?” 


“She is a hedgehog. She has a theory that explains everything, 
and it gives her the illusion that she understands the world.” 


“The question is not whether these experts are well trained. It is 
whether their world is predictable.” 



Intuitions vs. Formulas 


Paul Meehl was a strange and wonderful character, and one of the most 
versatile psychologists of the twentieth century. Among the departments in 
which he had faculty appointments at the University of Minnesota were 
psychology, law, psychiatry, neurology, and philosophy. He also wrote on 
religion, political science, and learning in rats. A statistically sophisticated 
researcher and a fierce critic of empty claims in clinical psychology, Meehl 
was also a practicing psychoanalyst. He wrote thoughtful essays on the 
philosophical foundations of psychological research that I almost 
memorized while I was a graduate student. I never met Meehl, but he was 
one of my heroes from the time I read his Clinical vs. Statistical 
Prediction: A Theoretical Analysis and a Reviewofthe Evidence. 

In the slim volume that he later called “my disturbing little book,” Meehl 
reviewed the results of 20 studies that had analyzed whether clinical 
predictions based on the subjective impressions of trained professionals 
were more accurate than statistical predictions made by combining a few 
scores or ratings according to a rule. In a typical study, trained counselors 
predicted the grades of freshmen at the end of the school year. The 
counselors interviewed each student for forty-five minutes. They also had 
access to high school grades, several aptitude tests, and a four-page 
personal statement. The statistical algorithm used only a fraction of this 
information: high school grades and one aptitude test. Nevertheless, the 
formula was more accurate than 11 of the 14 counselors. Meehl reported 
generally similar results across a variety of other forecast outcomes, 
including violations of parole, success in pilot training, and criminal 
recidivism. 

Not surprisingly, Meehl’s book provoked shock and disbelief among 
clinical psychologists, and the controversy it started has engendered a 
stream of research that is still flowing today, more than fifty yephy®Jb 
diars after its publication. The number of studies reporting comparisons of 
clinical and statistical predictions has increased to roughly two hundred, 
but the score in the contest between algorithms and humans has not 
changed. About 60% of the studies have shown significantly better 
accuracy for the algorithms. The other comparisons scored a draw in 
accuracy, but a tie is tantamount to a win for the statistical rules, which are 
normally much less expensive to use than expert judgment. No exception 
has been convincingly documented. 

The range of predicted outcomes has expanded to cover medical 
variables such as the longevity of cancer patients, the length of hospital 
stays, the diagnosis of cardiac disease, and the susceptibility of babies to 



sudden infant death syndrome; economic measures such as the prospects 
of success for new businesses, the evaluation of credit risks by banks, and 
the future career satisfaction of workers; questions of interest to 
government agencies, including assessments of the suitability of foster 
parents, the odds of recidivism among juvenile offenders, and the 
likelihood of other forms of violent behavior; and miscellaneous outcomes 
such as the evaluation of scientific presentations, the winners of football 
games, and the future prices of Bordeaux wine. Each of these domains 
entails a significant degree of uncertainty and unpredictability. We 
describe them as “low-validity environments.” In every case, the accuracy 
of experts was matched or exceeded by a simple algorithm. 

As Meehl pointed out with justified pride thirty years after the publication 
of his book, “There is no controversy in social science which shows such a 
large body of qualitatively diverse studies coming out so uniformly in the 
same direction as this one.” 

The Princeton economist and wine lover Orley AshenfeIter has offered a 
compelling demonstration of the power of simple statistics to outdo world- 
renowned experts. Ashenfelter wanted to predict the future value of fine 
Bordeaux wines from information available in the year they are made. The 
question is important because fine wines take years to reach their peak 
quality, and the prices of mature wines from the same vineyard vary 
dramatically across different vintages; bottles filled only twelve months 
apart can differ in value by a factor of 10 or more. An ability to forecast 
future prices is of substantial value, because investors buy wine, like art, in 
the anticipation that its value will appreciate. 

It is generally agreed that the effect of vintage can be due only to 
variations in the weather during the grape-growing season. The best wines 
are produced when the summer is warm and dry, which makes the 
Bordeaux wine industry a likely beneficiary of global warming. The industry 
is also helped by wet springs, which increase quantity without much effect 
on quality. Ashenfelter converted that conventional knowledge into a 
statistical formula that predicts the price of a wine—for a particular 
property and at a particular age—by three features of the weather: the 
average temperature over the summer growing season, the amount of rain 
at harvest-time, and the total rainfall during the previous winter. His formula 
provides accurate price forecasts years and even decades into the future. 
Indeed, his formula forecasts future prices much more accurately than the 
current prices of young wines do. This new example of a “Meehl pattern” 
challenges the abilities of the experts whose opinions help shape the early 
price. It also challenges economic theory, according to which prices should 
reflect all the available information, including the weather. Ashenfelter’s 
formula is extremely accurate—the correlation between his predictions and 



actual prices is above .90. 

Why are experts e yinferior to algorithms? One reason, which Meehl 
suspected, is that experts try to be clever, think outside the box, and 
consider complex combinations of features in making their predictions. 
Complexity may work in the odd case, but more often than not it reduces 
validity. Simple combinations of features are better. Several studies have 
shown that human decision makers are inferior to a prediction formula 
even when they are given the score suggested by the formula! They feel 
that they can overrule the formula because they have additional information 
about the case, but they are wrong more often than not. According to 
Meehl, there are few circumstances under which it is a good idea to 
substitute judgment for a formula. In a famous thought experiment, he 
described a formula that predicts whether a particular person will go to the 
movies tonight and noted that it is proper to disregard the formula if 
information is received that the individual broke a leg today. The name 
“broken-leg rule” has stuck. The point, of course, is that broken legs are 
very rare—as well as decisive. 

Another reason for the inferiority of expert judgment is that humans are 
incorrigibly inconsistent in making summary judgments of complex 
information. When asked to evaluate the same information twice, they 
frequently give different answers. The extent of the inconsistency is often a 
matter of real concern. Experienced radiologists who evaluate chest X- 
rays as “normal” or “abnormal” contradict themselves 20% of the time 
when they see the same picture on separate occasions. A study of 101 
independent auditors who were asked to evaluate the reliability of internal 
corporate audits revealed a similar degree of inconsistency. A review of 
41 separate studies of the reliability of judgments made by auditors, 
pathologists, psychologists, organizational managers, and other 
professionals suggests that this level of inconsistency is typical, even when 
a case is reevaluated within a few minutes. Unreliable judgments cannot 
be valid predictors of anything. 

The widespread inconsistency is probably due to the extreme context 
dependency of System 1. We know from studies of priming that unnoticed 
stimuli in our environment have a substantial influence on our thoughts and 
actions. These influences fluctuate from moment to moment. The brief 
pleasure of a cool breeze on a hot day may make you slightly more 
positive and optimistic about whatever you are evaluating at the time. The 
prospects of a convict being granted parole may change significantly 
during the time that elapses between successive food breaks in the parole 
judges’ schedule. Because you have little direct knowledge of what goes 
on in your mind, you will never know that you might have made a different 



judgment or reached a different decision under very slightly different 
circumstances. Formulas do not suffer from such problems. Given the 
same input, they always return the same answer. When predictability is 
poor—which it is in most of the studies reviewed by Meehl and his 
followers—inconsistency is destructive of any predictive validity. 

The research suggests a surprising conclusion: to maximize predictive 
accuracy, final decisions should be left to formulas, especially in low- 
validity environments. In admission decisions for medical schools, for 
example, the final determination is often made by the faculty members who 
interview the candidate. The evidence is fragmentary, but there are solid 
grounds for a conjecture: conducting an interview is likely to diminish the 
accuracy of a selection procedure, if the interviewers also make the final 
admission decisions. Because interviewers are overconfident in their 
intuitions, they will assign too much weight to their personal impressions 
and too little weight to other sources of information, lowering validity. 
Similarly, the experts who evaluate the quas plity of immature wine to 
predict its future have a source of information that almost certainly makes 
things worse rather than better: they can taste the wine. In addition, of 
course, even if they have a good understanding of the effects of the 
weather on wine quality, they will not be able to maintain the consistency of 
a formula. 


The most important development in the field since Meehl’s original work is 
Robyn Dawes’s famous article “The Robust Beauty of Improper Linear 
Models in Decision Making.” The dominant statistical practice in the social 
sciences is to assign weights to the different predictors by following an 
algorithm, called multiple regression, that is now built into conventional 
software. The logic of multiple regression is unassailable: it finds the 
optimal formula for putting together a weighted combination of the 
predictors. However, Dawes observed that the complex statistical 
algorithm adds little or no value. One can do just as well by selecting a set 
of scores that have some validity for predicting the outcome and adjusting 
the values to make them comparable (by using standard scores or ranks). 
A formula that combines these predictors with equal weights is likely to be 
just as accurate in predicting new cases as the multiple-regression formula 
that was optimal in the original sample. More recent research went further: 
formulas that assign equal weights to all the predictors are often superior, 
because they are not affected by accidents of sampling. 

The surprising success of equal-weighting schemes has an important 
practical implication: it is possible to develop useful algorithms without any 
prior statistical research. Simple equally weighted formulas based on 



existing statistics or on common sense are often very good predictors of 
significant outcomes. In a memorable example, Dawes showed that 
marital stability is well predicted by a formula: 

frequency of lovemaking minus frequency of quarrels 

You don’t want your result to be a negative number. 

The important conclusion from this research is that an algorithm that is 
constructed on the back of an envelope is often good enough to compete 
with an optimally weighted formula, and certainly good enough to outdo 
expert judgment. This logic can be applied in many domains, ranging from 
the selection of stocks by portfolio managers to the choices of medical 
treatments by doctors or patients. 

A classic application of this approach is a simple algorithm that has 
saved the lives of hundreds of thousands of infants. Obstetricians had 
always known that an infant who is not breathing normally within a few 
minutes of birth is at high risk of brain damage or death. Until the 
anesthesiologist Virginia Apgar intervened in 1953, physicians and 
midwives used their clinical judgment to determine whether a baby was in 
distress. Different practitioners focused on different cues. Some watched 
for breathing problems while others monitored how soon the baby cried. 
Without a standardized procedure, danger signs were often missed, and 
many newborn infants died. 


One day over breakfast, a medical resident asked how Dr. Apgar would 
make a systematic assessment of a newborn. “That’s easy,” she replied. 
“\bu would do it like this.” Apgar jotted down five variables (heart rate, 
respiration, reflex, muscle tone, and color) and three scores (0, 1, or 2, 
depending on the robustness of each sign). Realizing that she might have 
made a breakequthrough that any delivery room could implement, Apgar 
began rating infants by this rule one minute after they were born. A baby 
with a total score of 8 or above was likely to be pink, squirming, crying, 
grimacing, with a pulse of 100 or more—in good shape. A baby with a 
score of 4 or below was probably bluish, flaccid, passive, with a slow or 
weak pulse—in need of immediate intervention. Applying Apgar’s score, 
the staff in delivery rooms finally had consistent standards for determining 
which babies were in trouble, and the formula is credited for an important 
contribution to reducing infant mortality. The Apgar test is still used every 
day in every delivery room. Atul Gawande’s recent A Checklist Manifesto 
provides many other examples of the virtues of checklists and simple rules. 



The Hostility to Algorithms 

From the very outset, clinical psychologists responded to Meehl’s ideas 
with hostility and disbelief. Clearly, they were in the grip of an illusion of skill 
in terms of their ability to make long-term predictions. On reflection, it is 
easy to see how the illusion came about and easy to sympathize with the 
clinicians’ rejection of Meehl’s research. 

The statistical evidence of clinical inferiority contradicts clinicians’ 
everyday experience of the quality of their judgments. Psychologists who 
work with patients have many hunches during each therapy session, 
anticipating how the patient will respond to an intervention, guessing what 
will happen next. Many of these hunches are confirmed, illustrating the 
reality of clinical skill. 

The problem is that the correct judgments involve short-term predictions 
in the context of the therapeutic interview, a skill in which therapists may 
have years of practice. The tasks at which they fail typically require long¬ 
term predictions about the patient’s future. These are much more difficult, 
even the best formulas do only modestly well, and they are also tasks that 
the clinicians have never had the opportunity to learn properly—they would 
have to wait years for feedback, instead of receiving the instantaneous 
feedback of the clinical session. However, the line between what clinicians 
can do well and what they cannot do at all well is not obvious, and certainly 
not obvious to them. They know they are skilled, but they don’t necessarily 
know the boundaries of their skill. Not surprisingly, then, the idea that a 
mechanical combination of a few variables could outperform the subtle 
complexity of human judgment strikes experienced clinicians as obviously 
wrong. 

The debate about the virtues of clinical and statistical prediction has 
always had a moral dimension. The statistical method, Meehl wrote, was 
criticized by experienced clinicians as “mechanical, atomistic, additive, cut 
and dried, artificial, unreal, arbitrary, incomplete, dead, pedantic, 
fractionated, trivial, forced, static, superficial, rigid, sterile, academic, 
pseudoscientific and blind.” The clinical method, on the other hand, was 
lauded by its proponents as “dynamic, global, meaningful, holistic, subtle, 
sympathetic, configural, patterned, organized, rich, deep, genuine, 
sensitive, sophisticated, real, living, concrete, natural, true to life, and 
understanding.” 

This is an attitude we can all recognize. When a human competes with a 
machine, whether it is John Henry a-hammerin’ on the mountain or the 
chess genius Garry Kasparov facing off against the computer Deep Blue, 
our sympathies lie with our fellow human. The aversion to algorithms 



making decisions that affect humans is rooted in the strong preference that 
many people have for the ormnatural over the synthetic or artificial. Asked 
whether they would rather eat an organic or a commercially grown apple, 
most people prefer the “all natural” one. Even after being informed that the 
two apples taste the same, have identical nutritional value, and are equally 
healthful, a majority still prefer the organic fruit. Even the producers of beer 
have found that they can increase sales by putting “All Natural” or “No 
Preservatives” on the label. 

The deep resistance to the demystification of expertise is illustrated by 
the reaction of the European wine community to Ashenfelter’s formula for 
predicting the price of Bordeaux wines. Ashenfelter’s formula answered a 
prayer: one might thus have expected that wine lovers everywhere would 
be grateful to him for demonstrably improving their ability to identify the 
wines that later would be good. Not so. The response in French wine 
circles, wrote The New York Times, ranged “somewhere between violent 
and hysterical.” Ashenfelter reports that one oenophile called his findings 
“ludicrous and absurd.” Another scoffed, “It is like judging movies without 
actually seeing them.” 

The prejudice against algorithms is magnified when the decisions are 
consequential. Meehl remarked, “I do not quite know how to alleviate the 
horror some clinicians seem to experience when they envisage a treatable 
case being denied treatment because a ‘blind, mechanical’ equation 
misclassifies him.” In contrast, Meehl and other proponents of algorithms 
have argued strongly that it is unethical to rely on intuitive judgments for 
important decisions if an algorithm is available that will make fewer 
mistakes. Their rational argument is compelling, but it runs against a 
stubborn psychological reality: for most people, the cause of a mistake 
matters. The story of a child dying because an algorithm made a mistake 
is more poignant than the story of the same tragedy occurring as a result of 
human error, and the difference in emotional intensity is readily translated 
into a moral preference. 

Fortunately, the hostility to algorithms will probably soften as their role in 
everyday life continues to expand. Looking for books or music we might 
enjoy, we appreciate recommendations generated by soft ware. We take it 
for granted that decisions about credit limits are made without the direct 
intervention of any human judgment. We are increasingly exposed to 
guidelines that have the form of simple algorithms, such as the ratio of 
good and bad cholesterol levels we should strive to attain. The public is 
now well aware that formulas may do better than humans in some critical 
decisions in the world of sports: how much a professional team should pay 
for particular rookie players, or when to punt on fourth down. The 
expanding list of tasks that are assigned to algorithms should eventually 



reduce the discomfort that most people feel when they first encounter the 
pattern of results that Meehl described in his disturbing little book. 

Learning from Meehl 

In 1955, as a twenty-one-year-old lieutenant in the Israeli Defense Forces, I 
was assigned to set up an interview system for the entire army. If you 
wonder why such a responsibility would be forced upon someone so 
young, bear in mind that the state of Israel itself was only seven years old at 
the time; all its institutions were under construction, and someone had to 
build them. Odd as it sounds today, my bachelor’s degree in psychology 
probably qualified me as the best-trained psychologist in the army. My 
direct supervisor, a brilliant researcher, had a degree in chemistry. 

An idilnterview routine was already in place when I was given my 
mission. Every soldier drafted into the army completed a battery of 
psychometric tests, and each man considered for combat duty was 
interviewed for an assessment of personality. The goal was to assign the 
recruit a score of general fitness for combat and to find the best match of 
his personality among various branches: infantry, artillery, armor, and so 
on. The interviewers were themselves young draftees, selected for this 
assignment by virtue of their high intelligence and interest in dealing with 
people. Most were women, who were at the time exempt from combat 
duty. Trained for a few weeks in how to conduct a fifteen- to twenty-minute 
interview, they were encouraged to cover a range of topics and to form a 
general impression of how well the recruit would do in the army. 

Unfortunately, follow-up evaluations had already indicated that this 
interview procedure was almost useless for predicting the future success 
of recruits. I was instructed to design an interview that would be more 
useful but would not take more time. I was also told to try out the new 
interview and to evaluate its accuracy. From the perspective of a serious 
professional, I was no more qualified for the task than I was to build a 
bridge across the Amazon. 

Fortunately, I had read Paul Meehl’s “little book,” which had appeared 
just a year earlier. I was convinced by his argument that simple, statistical 
rules are superior to intuitive “clinical” judgments. I concluded that the then 
current interview had failed at least in part because it allowed the 
interviewers to do what they found most interesting, which was to learn 
about the dynamics of the interviewee’s mental life. Instead, we should use 
the limited time at our disposal to obtain as much specific information as 
possible about the interviewee’s life in his normal environment. Another 
lesson I learned from Meehl was that we should abandon the procedure in 


which the interviewers’ global evaluations of the recruit determined the final 
decision. Meehl’s book suggested that such evaluations should not be 
trusted and that statistical summaries of separately evaluated attributes 
would achieve higher validity. 

I decided on a procedure in which the interviewers would evaluate 
several relevant personality traits and score each separately. The final 
score of fitness for combat duty would be computed according to a 
standard formula, with no further input from the interviewers. I made up a 
list of six characteristics that appeared relevant to performance in a 
combat unit, including “responsibility,” “sociability,” and “masculine pride.” I 
then composed, for each trait, a series of factual questions about the 
individual’s life before his enlistment, including the number of different jobs 
he had held, how regular and punctual he had been in his work or studies, 
the frequency of his interactions with friends, and his interest and 
participation in sports, among others. The idea was to evaluate as 
objectively as possible how well the recruit had done on each dimension. 

By focusing on standardized, factual questions, I hoped to combat the 
halo effect, where favorable first impressions influence later judgments. As 
a further precaution against halos, I instructed the interviewers to go 
through the six traits in a fixed sequence, rating each trait on a five-point 
scale before going on to the next. And that was that. I informed the 
interviewers that they need not concern themselves with the recruit’s future 
adjustment to the military. Their only task was to elicit relevant facts about 
his past and to use that information to score each personality dimension. 
“\bur function is to provide reliable measurements,” I told them. “Leave the 
predicok tive validity to me,” by which I meant the formula that I was going 
to devise to combine their specific ratings. 

The interviewers came close to mutiny. These bright young people were 
displeased to be ordered, by someone hardly older than themselves, to 
switch off their intuition and focus entirely on boring factual questions. One 
of them complained, “You are turning us into robots!” So I compromised. 
“Carry out the interview exactly as instructed,” I told them, “and when you 
are done, have your wish: close your eyes, try to imagine the recruit as a 
soldier, and assign him a score on a scale of 1 to 5.” 

Several hundred interviews were conducted by this new method, and a 
few months later we collected evaluations of the soldiers’ performance 
from the commanding officers of the units to which they had been 
assigned. The results made us happy. As Meehl’s book had suggested, 
the new interview procedure was a substantial improvement over the old 
one. The sum of our six ratings predicted soldiers’ performance much 
more accurately than the global evaluations of the previous interviewing 
method, although far from perfectly. We had progressed from “completely 



useless” to “moderately useful.” 

The big surprise to me was that the intuitive judgment that the 
interviewers summoned up in the “close your eyes” exercise also did very 
well, indeed just as well as the sum of the six specific ratings. I learned 
from this finding a lesson that I have never forgotten: intuition adds value 
even in the justly derided selection interview, but only after a disciplined 
collection of objective information and disciplined scoring of separate 
traits. I set a formula that gave the “close your eyes” evaluation the same 
weight as the sum of the six trait ratings. A more general lesson that I 
learned from this episode was do not simply trust intuitive judgment—your 
own or that of others—but do not dismiss it, either. 

Some forty-five years later, after I won a Nobel Prize in economics, I was 
for a short time a minor celebrity in Israel. On one of my visits, someone 
had the idea of escorting me around my old army base, which still housed 
the unit that interviews new recruits. I was introduced to the commanding 
officer of the Psychological Unit, and she described their current 
interviewing practices, which had not changed much from the system I had 
designed: there was, it turned out, a considerable amount of research 
indicating that the interviews still worked well. As she came to the end of 
her description of how the interviews are conducted, the officer added, 
“And then we tell them, ‘Close your eyes.’” 

Do It Yourself 

The message of this chapter is readily applicable to tasks other than 
making manpower decisions for an army. Implementing interview 
procedures in the spirit of Meehl and Dawes requires relatively little effort 
but substantial discipline. Suppose that you need to hire a sales 
representative for your firm. If you are serious about hiring the best 
possible person for the job, this is what you should do. First, select a few 
traits that are prerequisites for success in this position (technical 
proficiency, engaging personality, reliability, and so on). Don’t overdo it— 
six dimensions is a good number. The traits you choose should be as 
independent as possible from each other, and you should feel that you can 
assess them reliably by asking a few factual questions. Next, make a list of 
those questions for each trait and think about how you will score it, say on 
a 1-5 scale. You should have an idea of what you will caleigl “very weak” or 
“very strong.” 

These preparations should take you half an hour or so, a small 
investment that can make a significant difference in the quality of the 
people you hire. To avoid halo effects, you must collect the information on 



one trait at a time, scoring each before you move on to the next one. Do 
not skip around. To evaluate each candidate, add up the six scores. 
Because you are in charge of the final decision, you should not do a “close 
your eyes.” Firmly resolve that you will hire the candidate whose final score 
is the highest, even if there is another one whom you like better—try to 
resist your wish to invent broken legs to change the ranking. A vast amount 
of research offers a promise: you are much more likely to find the best 
candidate if you use this procedure than if you do what people normally do 
in such situations, which is to go into the interview unprepared and to make 
choices by an overall intuitive judgment such as “I looked into his eyes and 
liked what I saw.” 

Speaking of Judges vs. Formulas 


“Whenever we can replace human judgment by a formula, we 
should at least consider it.” 


“He thinks his judgments are complex and subtle, but a simple 
combination of scores could probably do better.” 


“Let’s decide in advance what weight to give to the data we have 
on the candidates’ past performance. Otherwise we will give too 
much weight to our impression from the interviews.” 



Expert Intuition: When Can We Trust It? 


Professional controversies bring out the worst in academics. Scientific 
journals occasionally publish exchanges, often beginning with someone’s 
critique of another’s research, followed by a reply and a rejoinder. I have 
always thought that these exchanges are a waste of time. Especially when 
the original critique is sharply worded, the reply and the rejoinder are often 
exercises in what I have called sarcasm for beginners and advanced 
sarcasm. The replies rarely concede anything to a biting critique, and it is 
almost unheard of for a rejoinder to admit that the original critique was 
misguided or erroneous in anyway. On a few occasions I have responded 
to criticisms that I thought were grossly misleading, because a failure to 
respond can be interpreted as conceding error, but I have never found the 
hostile exchanges instructive. In search of another way to deal with 
disagreements, I have engaged in a few “adversarial collaborations,” in 
which scholars who disagree on the science agree to write a jointly 
authored paper on their differences, and sometimes conduct research 
together. In especially tense situations, the research is moderated by an 
arbiter. 

My most satisfying and productive adversarial collaboration was with 
Gary Klein, the intellectual leader of an association of scholars and 
practitioners who do not like the kind of work I do. They call themselves 
students of Naturalistic Decision Making, or NDM, and mostly work in 
organizations where the"0%Jb ty often study how experts work. The N 
DMers adamantly reject the focus on biases in the heuristics and biases 
approach. They criticize this model as overly concerned with failures and 
driven by artificial experiments rather than by the study of real people doing 
things that matter. They are deeply skeptical about the value of using rigid 
algorithms to replace human judgment, and Paul Meehl is not among their 
heroes. Gary Klein has eloquently articulated this position over many 
years. 

This is hardly the basis for a beautiful friendship, but there is more to the 
story. I had never believed that intuition is always misguided. I had also 
been a fan of Klein’s studies of expertise in firefighters since I first saw a 
draft of a paper he wrote in the 1970s, and was impressed by his book 
Sources of Power, much of which analyzes how experienced professionals 
develop intuitive skills. I invited him to join in an effort to map the boundary 
that separates the marvels of intuition from its flaws. He was intrigued by 
the idea and we went ahead with the project—with no certainty that it would 
succeed. We set out to answer a specific question: When can you trust an 
experienced professional who claims to have an intuition? It was obvious 



that Klein would be more disposed to be trusting, and I would be more 
skeptical. But could we agree on principles for answering the general 
question? 

Over seven or eight years we had many discussions, resolved many 
disagreements, almost blew up more than once, wrote many draft s, 
became friends, and eventually published a joint article with a title that tells 
the story: “Conditions for Intuitive Expertise: A Failure to Disagree.” 
Indeed, we did not encounter real issues on which we disagreed—but we 
did not really agree. 


Marvels and Flaws 

Malcolm Gladwell’s bestseller Blink appeared while Klein and I were 
working on the project, and it was reassuring to find ourselves in 
agreement about it. Glad well’s book opens with the memorable story of art 
experts faced with an object that is described as a magnificent example of 
a kouros, a sculpture of a striding boy. Several of the experts had strong 
visceral reactions: they felt in their gut that the statue was a fake but were 
not able to articulate what it was about it that made them uneasy. Everyone 
who read the book—millions did—remembers that story as a triumph of 
intuition. The experts agreed that they knew the sculpture was a fake 
without knowing how they knew—the very definition of intuition. The story 
appears to imply that a systematic search for the cue that guided the 
experts would have failed, but Klein and I both rejected that conclusion. 
From our point of view, such an inquiry was needed, and if it had been 
conducted properly (which Klein knows how to do), it would probably have 
succeeded. 

Although many readers of the kouros example were surely drawn to an 
almost magical view of expert intuition, Gladwell himself does not hold that 
position. In a later chapter he describes a massive failure of intuition: 
Americans elected President Harding, whose only qualification for the 
position was that he perfectly looked the part. Square jawed and tall, he 
was the perfect image of a strong and decisive leader. People voted for 
someone who looked strong and decisive without any other reason to 
believe that he was. An intuitive prediction of how Harding would perform 
as president arose from substituting one question for another. A reader of 
this book should expect such an intuition to be held with confidence. 

Intuition as Recognition 

The early experiences that shaped Klein’s views of intuition were starkly 



different from mine. My thinking was formed by observing the illusion of 
validity in myself and by reading Paul Meehl’s demonstrations of the 
inferiority of clinical prediction. In contrast, Klein’s views were shaped by 
his early studies of fireground commanders (the leaders of firefighting 
teams). He followed them as they fought fires and later interviewed the 
leader about his thoughts as he made decisions. As Klein described it in 
our joint article, he and his collaborators 

investigated how the commanders could make good decisions 
without comparing options. The initial hypothesis was that 
commanders would restrict their analysis to only a pair of options, 
but that hypothesis proved to be incorrect. In fact, the 
commanders usually generated only a single option, and that was 
all they needed. They could draw on the repertoire of patterns that 
they had compiled during more than a decade of both real and 
virtual experience to identify a plausible option, which they 
considered first. They evaluated this option by mentally simulating 
it to see if it would work in the situation they were facing.... If the 
course of action they were considering seemed appropriate, they 
would implement it. If it had shortcomings, they would modify it. If 
they could not easily modify it, they would turn to the next most 
plausible option and run through the same procedure until an 
acceptable course of action was found. 

Klein elaborated this description into a theory of decision making that he 
called the recognition-primed decision (RPD) model, which applies to 
firefighters but also describes expertise in other domains, including chess. 
The process involves both System 1 and System 2. In the first phase, a 
tentative plan comes to mind by an automatic function of associative 
memory—System 1. The next phase is a deliberate process in which the 
plan is mentally simulated to check if it will work—an operation of System 
2. The model of intuitive decision making as pattern recognition develops 
ideas presented some time ago by Herbert Simon, perhaps the only 
scholar who is recognized and admired as a hero and founding figure by 
all the competing clans and tribes in the study of decision making. I quoted 
Herbert Simon’s definition of intuition in the intr
oduction, but it will make 
more sense when I repeat it now: “The situation has provided a cue; this 
cue has given the expert access to information stored in memory, and the 
information provides the answer. Intuition is nothing more and nothing less 
than recognition.” 

This strong statement reduces the apparent magic of intuition to the 
everyday experience of memory. We marvel at the story of the firefighter 



who has a sudden urge to escape a burning house just before it collapses, 
because the firefighter knows the danger intuitively, “without knowing how 
he knows.” However, we also do not know how we immediately know that a 
person we see as we enter a room is our friend Peter. The moral of 
Simon’s remark is that the mystery of knowing without knowing is not a 
distinctive feature of intuition; it is the norm of mental life. 

Acquiring Skill 

How does the information that supports intuition get “stored in memory”? 
Certain types of intuitions are acquired very quickly. We have inherited 
from our ancestors a great facility to learn when to be afraid. Indeed, one 
experience is often sufficient to establish a long-term aversion and fear. 
Many of us have the visceral memory of a single dubious dish tto hat still 
leaves us vaguely reluctant to return to a restaurant. All of us tense up when 
we approach a spot in which an unpleasant event occurred, even when 
there is no reason to expect it to happen again. For me, one such place is 
the ramp leading to the San Francisco airport, where years ago a driver in 
the throes of road rage followed me from the freeway, rolled down his 
window, and hurled obscenities at me. I never knew what caused his 
hatred, but I remember his voice whenever I reach that point on my way to 
the airport. 

My memory of the airport incident is conscious and it fully explains the 
emotion that comes with it. On many occasions, however, you may feel 
uneasy in a particular place or when someone uses a particular turn of 
phrase without having a conscious memory of the triggering event. In 
hindsight, you will label that unease an intuition if it is followed by a bad 
experience. This mode of emotional learning is closely related to what 
happened in Pavlov’s famous conditioning experiments, in which the dogs 
learned to recognize the sound of the bell as a signal that food was 
coming. What Pavlov’s dogs learned can be described as a learned hope. 
Learned fears are even more easily acquired. 

Fear can also be learned—quite easily, in fact—bywords rather than by 
experience. The fireman who had the “sixth sense” of danger had certainly 
had many occasions to discuss and think about types of fires he was not 
involved in, and to rehearse in his mind what the cues might be and how he 
should react. As I remember from experience, a young platoon 
commander with no experience of combat will tense up while leading 
troops through a narrowing ravine, because he was taught to identify the 
terrain as favoring an ambush. Little repetition is needed for learning. 

Emotional learning may be quick, but what we consider as “expertise” 



usually takes a long time to develop. The acquisition of expertise in 
complex tasks such as high-level chess, professional basketball, or 
firefighting is intricate and slow because expertise in a domain is not a 
single skill but rather a large collection of miniskills. Chess is a good 
example. An expert player can understand a complex position at a glance, 
but it takes years to develop that level of ability. Studies of chess masters 
have shown that at least 10,000 hours of dedicated practice (about 6 years 
of playing chess 5 hours a day) are required to attain the highest levels of 
performance. During those hours of intense concentration, a serious chess 
player becomes familiar with thousands of configurations, each consisting 
of an arrangement of related pieces that can threaten or defend each 
other. 

Learning high-level chess can be compared to learning to read. A first 
grader works hard at recognizing individual letters and assembling them 
into syllables and words, but a good adult reader perceives entire clauses. 
An expert reader has also acquired the ability to assemble familiar 
elements in a new pattern and can quickly “recognize” and correctly 
pronounce a word that she has never seen before. In chess, recurrent 
patterns of interacting pieces play the role of letters, and a chess position 
is a long word or a sentence. 

A skilled reader who sees it for the first time will be able to read the 
opening stanza of Lewis Carroll’s “Jabberwocky” with perfect rhythm and 
intonation, as well as pleasure: 


’Twas brillig, and the slithytoves 
Did gyre and gimble in the wabe: 
All mimsy were the borogoves, 
And the mome raths outgrabe. 


Acquiring expertise in chess is harder and slower than learning to read 
because there are many more letters in the “alphabet” of chess and 
because the “words” consist of many letters. After thousands of hours of 
practice, however, chess masters are able to read a chess situation at a 
glance. The few moves that come to their mind are almost always strong 
and sometimes creative. They can deal with a “word” they have never 
encountered, and they can find a new way to interpret a familiar one. 


The Environment of Skill 



Klein and I quickly found that we agreed both on the nature of intuitive skill 
and on how it is acquired. We still needed to agree on our key question: 
When can you trust a self-confident professional who claims to have an 
intuition? 

We eventually concluded that our disagreement was due in part to the 
fact that we had different experts in mind. Klein had spent much time with 
fireground commanders, clinical nurses, and other professionals who have 
real expertise. I had spent more time thinking about clinicians, stock 
pickers, and political scientists trying to make unsupportable long-term 
forecasts. Not surprisingly, his default attitude was trust and respect; mine 
was skepticism. He was more willing to trust experts who claim an intuition 
because, as he told me, true experts know the limits of their knowledge. I 
argued that there are many pseudo-experts who have no idea that they do 
not know what they are doing (the illusion of validity), and that as a general 
proposition subjective confidence is commonly too high and often 
uninformative. 

Earlier I traced people’s confidence in a belief to two related 
impressions: cognitive ease and coherence. We are confident when the 
story we tell ourselves comes easily to mind, with no contradiction and no 
competing scenario. But ease and coherence do not guarantee that a 
belief held with confidence is true. The associative machine is set to 
suppress doubt and to evoke ideas and information that are compatible 
with the currently dominant story. A mind that follows WY SIATI will achieve 
high confidence much too easily by ignoring what it does not know. It is 
therefore not surprising that many of us are prone to have high confidence 
in unfounded intuitions. Klein and I eventually agreed on an important 
principle: the confidence that people have in their intuitions is not a reliable 
guide to their validity. In other words, do not trust anyone—including 
yourself—to tell you how much you should trust their judgment. 

If subjective confidence is not to be trusted, how can we evaluate the 
probable validity of an intuitive judgment? When do judgments reflect true 
expertise? When do they display an illusion of validity? The answer comes 
from the two basic conditions for acquiring a skill: 


• an environment that is sufficiently regular to be predictable 

• an opportunity to learn these regularities through prolonged practice 


When both these conditions are satisfied, intuitions are likely to be skilled. 
Chess is an extreme example of a regular environment, but bridge and 



poker also provide robust statistical regularities that can support skill. 
Physicians, nurses, athletes, and firefighters also face complex but 
fundamentally orderly situations. The accurate intuitions that Gary Klein has 
described are due to highly valid cues that es the expert’s System 1 has 
learned to use, even if System 2 has not learned to name them. In contrast, 
stock pickers and political scientists who make long-term forecasts 
operate in a zero-validity environment. Their failures reflect the basic 
unpredictability of the events that they try to forecast. 

Some environments are worse than irregular. Robin Hogarth described 
“wicked” environments, in which professionals are likely to learn the wrong 
lessons from experience. He borrows from Lewis Thomas the example of 
a physician in the early twentieth century who often had intuitions about 
patients who were about to develop typhoid. Unfortunately, he tested his 
hunch by palpating the patient’s tongue, without washing his hands 
between patients. When patient after patient became ill, the physician 
developed a sense of clinical infallibility. His predictions were accurate— 
but not because he was exercising professional intuition! 


Meehl’s clinicians were not inept and their failure was not due to lack of 
talent. They performed poorly because they were assigned tasks that did 
not have a simple solution. The clinicians’ predicament was less extreme 
than the zero-validity environment of long-term political forecasting, but they 
operated in low-validity situations that did not allow high accuracy. We 
know this to be the case because the best statistical algorithms, although 
more accurate than human judges, were never very accurate. Indeed, the 
studies by Meehl and his followers never produced a “smoking gun” 
demonstration, a case in which clinicians completely missed a highly valid 
cue that the algorithm detected. An extreme failure of this kind is unlikely 
because human learning is normally efficient. If a strong predictive cue 
exists, human observers will find it, given a decent opportunity to do so. 
Statistical algorithms greatly outdo humans in noisy environments for two 
reasons: they are more likely than human judges to detect weakly valid 
cues and much more likely to maintain a modest level of accuracy by using 
such cues consistently. 

It is wrong to blame anyone for failing to forecast accurately in an 
unpredictable world. However, it seems fair to blame professionals for 
believing they can succeed in an impossible task. Claims for correct 
intuitions in an unpredictable situation are self-delusional at best, 
sometimes worse. In the absence of valid cues, intuitive “hits” are due 
either to luck or to lies. If you find this conclusion surprising, you still have a 
lingering belief that intuition is magic. Remember this rule: intuition cannot 



be trusted in the absence of stable regularities in the environment. 


Feedback and Practice 

Some regularities in the environment are easier to discover and apply than 
others. Think of how you developed your style of using the brakes on your 
car. As you were mastering the skill of taking curves, you gradually learned 
when to let go of the accelerator and when and how hard to use the brakes. 
Curves differ, and the variability you experienced while learning ensures 
that you are now ready to brake at the right time and strength for any curve 
you encounter. The conditions for learning this skill are ideal, because you 
receive immediate and unambiguous feedback every time you go around 
a bend: the mild reward of a comfortable turn or the mild punishment of 
some difficulty in handling the car if you brake either too hard or not quite 
hard enough. The situations that face a harbor pilot maneuvering large 
ships are no less regular, but skill is much more difficult to acquire by sheer 
experience because of the long delay between actions and their 
manoticeable outcomes. Whether professionals have a chance to develop 
intuitive expertise depends essentially on the quality and speed of 
feedback, as well as on sufficient opportunity to practice. 

Expertise is not a single skill; it is a collection of skills, and the same 
professional may be highly expert in some of the tasks in her domain while 
remaining a novice in others. By the time chess players become experts, 
they have “seen everything” (or almost everything), but chess is an 
exception in this regard. Surgeons can be much more proficient in some 
operations than in others. Furthermore, some aspects of any 
professional’s tasks are much easier to learn than others. 
Psychotherapists have many opportunities to observe the immediate 
reactions of patients to what they say. The feedback enables them to 
develop the intuitive skill to find the words and the tone that will calm anger, 
forge confidence, or focus the patient’s attention. On the other hand, 
therapists do not have a chance to identify which general treatment 
approach is most suitable for different patients. The feedback they receive 
from their patients’ long-term outcomes is sparse, delayed, or (usually) 
nonexistent, and in any case too ambiguous to support learning from 
experience. 

Among medical specialties, anesthesiologists benefit from good 
feedback, because the effects of their actions are likely to be quickly 
evident. In contrast, radiologists obtain little information about the accuracy 
of the diagnoses they make and about the pathologies they fail to detect. 
Anesthesiologists are therefore in a better position to develop useful 



intuitive skills. If an anesthesiologist says, “I have a feeling something is 
wrong,” everyone in the operating room should be prepared for an 
emergency. 

Here again, as in the case of subjective confidence, the experts may not 
know the limits of their expertise. An experienced psychotherapist knows 
that she is skilled in working out what is going on in her patient’s mind and 
that she has good intuitions about what the patient will say next. It is 
tempting for her to conclude that she can also anticipate how well the 
patient will do next year, but this conclusion is not equally justified. Short¬ 
term anticipation and long-term forecasting are different tasks, and the 
therapist has had adequate opportunity to learn one but not the other. 
Similarly, a financial expert may have skills in many aspects of his trade 
but not in picking stocks, and an expert in the Middle East knows many 
things but not the future. The clinical psychologist, the stock picker, and the 
pundit do have intuitive skills in some of their tasks, but they have not 
learned to identify the situations and the tasks in which intuition will betray 
them. The unrecognized limits of professional skill help explain why experts 
are often overconfident. 


Evaluating Validity 

At the end of our journey, Gary Klein and I agreed on a general answer to 
our initial question: When can you trust an experienced professional who 
claims to have an intuition? Our conclusion was that for the most part it is 
possible to distinguish intuitions that are likely to be valid from those that 
are likely to be bogus. As in the judgment of whether a work of art is 
genuine or a fake, you will usually do better by focusing on its provenance 
than by looking at the piece itself. If the environment is sufficiently regular 
and if the judge has had a chance to learn its regularities, the associative 
machinery will recognize situations and generate quick and accurate 
predictions and decisions. You can trust someone’s intuitions if these 
conditions are met. 

Unfortunately, associativentu memory also generates subjectively 
compelling intuitions that are false. Anyone who has watched the chess 
progress of a talented youngster knows well that skill does not become 
perfect all at once, and that on the way to near perfection some mistakes 
are made with great confidence. When evaluating expert intuition you 
should always consider whether there was an adequate opportunity to 
learn the cues, even in a regular environment. 

In a less regular, or low-validity, environment, the heuristics of judgment 
are invoked. System 1 is often able to produce quick answers to difficult 



questions by substitution, creating coherence where there is none. The 
question that is answered is not the one that was intended, but the answer 
is produced quickly and may be sufficiently plausible to pass the lax and 
lenient review of System 2. You may want to forecast the commercial future 
of a company, for example, and believe that this is what you are judging, 
while in fact your evaluation is dominated by your impressions of the 
energy and competence of its current executives. Because substitution 
occurs automatically, you often do not know the origin of a judgment that 
you (your System 2) endorse and adopt. If it is the only one that comes to 
mind, it may be subjectively undistinguishable from valid judgments that 
you make with expert confidence. This is why subjective confidence is not 
a good diagnostic of accuracy: judgments that answer the wrong question 
can also be made with high confidence. 

\bu may be asking, Why didn’t Gary Klein and I come up immediately 
with the idea of evaluating an expert’s intuition by assessing the regularity 
of the environment and the expert’s learning history—mostly setting aside 
the expert’s confidence? And what did we think the answer could be? 
These are good questions because the contours of the solution were 
apparent from the beginning. We knew at the outset that fireground 
commanders and pediatric nurses would end up on one side of the 
boundary of valid intuitions and that the specialties studied by Meehl would 
be on the other, along with stock pickers and pundits. 

It is difficult to reconstruct what it was that took us years, long hours of 
discussion, endless exchanges of draft s and hundreds of e-mails 
negotiating over words, and more than once almost giving up. But this is 
what always happens when a project ends reasonably well: once you 
understand the main conclusion, it seems it was always obvious. 

As the title of our article suggests, Klein and I disagreed less than we 
had expected and accepted joint solutions of almost all the substantive 
issues that were raised. However, we also found that our early differences 
were more than an intellectual disagreement. We had different attitudes, 
emotions, and tastes, and those changed remarkably little over the years. 
This is most obvious in the facts that we find amusing and interesting. Klein 
still winces when the word bias is mentioned, and he still enjoys stories in 
which algorithms or formal procedures lead to obviously absurd decisions. 
I tend to view the occasional failures of algorithms as opportunities to 
improve them. On the other hand, I find more pleasure than Klein does in 
the come-uppance of arrogant experts who claim intuitive powers in zero- 
validity situations. In the long run, however, finding as much intellectual 
agreement as we did is surely more important than the persistent 
emotional differences that remained. 



Speaking of Expert Intuition 


“How much expertise does she have in this particular task? How 
much practice has she had?” 


“Does he really believe that the environment of start-ups is 
sufficiently regular to justify an intuition that goes against the base 
rates?” 


“She is very confident in her decision, but subjective confidence 
is a poor index of the accuracy of a judgment.” 


“Did he really have an opportunity to learn? How quick and how 
clear was the feedback he received on his judgments?” 



The Outside View 


A few years after my collaboration with Amos began, I convinced some 
officials in the Israeli Ministry of Education of the need for a curriculum to 
teach judgment and decision making in high schools. The team that I 
assembled to design the curriculum and write a textbook for it included 
several experienced teachers, some of my psychology students, and 
Seymour Fox, then dean of the Hebrew University’s School of Education, 
who was an expert in curriculum development. 

After meeting every Friday afternoon for about a year, we had 
constructed a detailed outline of the syllabus, had written a couple of 
chapters, and had run a few sample lessons in the classroom. We all felt 
that we had made good progress. One day, as we were discussing 
procedures for estimating uncertain quantities, the idea of conducting an 
exercise occurred to me. I asked everyone to write down an estimate of 
how long it would take us to submit a finished draft of the textbook to the 
Ministry of Education. I was following a procedure that we already planned 
to incorporate into our curriculum: the proper way to elicit information from 
a group is not by starting with a public discussion but by confidentially 
collecting each person’s judgment. This procedure makes better use of the 
knowledge available to members of the group than the common practice of 
open discussion. I collected the estimates and jotted the results on the 
blackboard. They were narrowly centered around two years; the low end 
was one and a half, the high end two and a half years. 

Then I had another idea. I turned to Seymour, our curriculum expert, and 
asked whether he could think of other teams similar to ours that had 
developed a curriculum from scratch. This was a time when several 
pedagogical innovations like “new math” had been introduced, and 
Seymour said he could think of quite a few. I then asked whether he knew 
the history of these teams in some detail, and it turned out that he was 
familiar with several. I asked him to think of these teams when they had 
made as much progress as we had. How long, from that point, did it take 
them to finish their textbook projects? 

He fell silent. When he finally spoke, it seemed to me that he was 
blushing, embarrassed by his own answer: “\bu know, I never realized this 
before, but in fact not all the teams at a stage comparable to ours ever did 
complete their task. A substantial fraction of the teams ended up failing to 
finish the job.” 

This was worrisome; we had never considered the possibility that we 
might fail. My anxiety rising, I asked how large he estimated that fraction 
was. Rw !□ sidering t20;About40%,” he answered. By now, a pall of gloom 



was falling over the room. The next question was obvious: “Those who 
finished,” I asked. “How long did it take them?” “I cannot think of any group 
that finished in less than seven years,” he replied, “nor any that took more 
than ten.” 

I grasped at a straw: “When you compare our skills and resources to 
those of the other groups, how good are we? How would you rank us in 
comparison with these teams?” Seymour did not hesitate long this time. 
“We’re below average,” he said, “but not by much.” This came as a 
complete surprise to all of us—including Seymour, whose prior estimate 
had been well within the optimistic consensus of the group. Until I 
prompted him, there was no connection in his mind between his 
knowledge of the history of other teams and his forecast of our future. 

Our state of mind when we heard Seymour is not well described by 
stating what we “knew.” Surely all of us “knew” that a minimum of seven 
years and a 40% chance of failure was a more plausible forecast of the 
fate of our project than the numbers we had written on our slips of paper a 
few minutes earlier. But we did not acknowledge what we knew. The new 
forecast still seemed unreal, because we could not imagine how it could 
take so long to finish a project that looked so manageable. No crystal ball 
was available to tell us the strange sequence of unlikely events that were in 
our future. All we could see was a reasonable plan that should produce a 
book in about two years, conflicting with statistics indicating that other 
teams had failed or had taken an absurdly long time to complete their 
mission. What we had heard was base-rate information, from which we 
should have inferred a causal story: if so many teams failed, and if those 
that succeeded took so long, writing a curriculum was surely much harder 
than we had thought. But such an inference would have conflicted with our 
direct experience of the good progress we had been making. The 
statistics that Seymour provided were treated as base rates normally are 
—noted and promptly set aside. 

We should have quit that day. None of us was willing to invest six more 
years of work in a project with a 40% chance of failure. Although we must 
have sensed that persevering was not reasonable, the warning did not 
provide an immediately compelling reason to quit. After a few minutes of 
desultory debate, we gathered ourselves together and carried on as if 
nothing had happened. The book was eventually completed eight(!) years 
later. By that time I was no longer living in Israel and had long since ceased 
to be part of the team, which completed the task after many unpredictable 
vicissitudes. The initial enthusiasm for the idea in the Ministry of Education 
had waned by the time the text was delivered and it was never used. 

This embarrassing episode remains one of the most instructive 
experiences of my professional life. I eventually learned three lessons from 



it. The first was immediately apparent: I had stumbled onto a distinction 
between two profoundly different approaches to forecasting, which Amos 
and I later labeled the inside view and the outside view. The second lesson 
was that our initial forecasts of about two years for the completion of the 
project exhibited a planning fallacy. Our estimates were closer to a best- 
case scenario than to a realistic assessment. I was slower to accept the 
third lesson, which I call irrational perseverance: the folly we displayed that 
day in failing to abandon the project. Facing a choice, we gave up 
rationality rather than give up the enterprise. 

Drawn to the Inside View 

On that long-ago Friday, our curriculum expert made two judgments about 
the same problem and arrived at very different answers. The inside view is 
the one that all of us, including Seymour, spontaneously adopted to assess 
the future of our project. We focused on our specific circumstances and 
searched for evidence in our own experiences. We had a sketchy plan: we 
knew how many chapters we were going to write, and we had an idea of 
how long it had taken us to write the two that we had already done. The 
more cautious among us probably added a few months to their estimate 
as a margin of error. 

Extrapolating was a mistake. We were forecasting based on the 
information in front of us—WYSIATI—but the chapters we wrote first were 
probably easier than others, and our commitment to the project was 
probably then at its peak. But the main problem was that we failed to allow 
for what Donald Rumsfeld famously called the “unknown unknowns.” There 
was no way for us to foresee, that day, the succession of events that would 
cause the project to drag out for so long. The divorces, the illnesses, the 
crises of coordination with bureaucracies that delayed the work could not 
be anticipated. Such events not only cause the writing of chapters to slow 
down, they also produce long periods during which little or no progress is 
made at all. The same must have been true, of course, for the other teams 
that Seymour knew about. The members of those teams were also unable 
to imagine the events that would cause them to spend seven years to 
finish, or ultimately fail to finish, a project that they evidently had thought 
was very feasible. Like us, they did not know the odds they were facing. 
There are many ways for any plan to fail, and although most of them are too 
improbable to be anticipated, the likelihood that something will go wrong 
in a big project is high. 

The second question I asked Seymour directed his attention away from 
us and toward a class of similar cases. Seymour estimated the base rate 
of success in that reference class: 40% failure and seven to ten years for 



completion. His informal survey was surely not up to scientific standards of 
evidence, but it provided a reasonable basis for a baseline prediction: the 
prediction you make about a case if you know nothing except the category 
to which it belongs. As we saw earlier, the baseline prediction should be 
the anchor for further adjustments. If you are asked to guess the height of a 
woman about whom you know only that she lives in New York City, your 
baseline prediction is your best guess of the average height of women in 
the city. If you are now given case-specific information, for example that the 
woman’s son is the starting center of his high school basketball team, you 
will adjust your estimate away from the mean in the appropriate direction. 
Seymour’s comparison of our team to others suggested that the forecast 
of our outcome was slightly worse than the baseline prediction, which was 
already grim. 

The spectacular accuracy of the outside-view forecast in our problem 
was surely a fluke and should not count as evidence for the validity of the 
outside view. The argument for the outside view should be made on 
general grounds: if the reference class is properly chosen, the outside view 
will give an indication of where the ballpark is, and it may suggest, as it did 
in our case, that the inside-view forecasts are not even close to it. 

For a psychologist, the discrepancy between Seymour’s two judgments 
is striking. He had in his head all the knowledge required to estimate the 
statistics of an appropriate reference class, but he reached his initial 
estimate without ever using that knowledge. Seymour’s forecast from his 
insidethaa view was not an adjustment from the baseline prediction, which 
had not come to his mind. It was based on the particular circumstances of 
our efforts. Like the participants in the Tom W experiment, Seymour knew 
the relevant base rate but did not think of applying it. 

Unlike Seymour, the rest of us did not have access to the outside view 
and could not have produced a reasonable baseline prediction. It is 
noteworthy, however, that we did not feel we needed information about 
other teams to make our guesses. My request for the outside view 
surprised all of us, including me! This is a common pattern: people who 
have information about an individual case rarely feel the need to know the 
statistics of the class to which the case belongs. 

When we were eventually exposed to the outside view, we collectively 
ignored it. We can recognize what happened to us; it is similar to the 
experiment that suggested the futility of teaching psychology. When they 
made predictions about individual cases about which they had a little 
information (a brief and bland interview), Nisbett and Borgida’s students 
completely neglected the global results they had just learned. “Pallid” 
statistical information is routinely discarded when it is incompatible with 



one’s personal impressions of a case. In the competition with the inside 
view, the outside view doesn’t stand a chance. 

The preference for the inside view sometimes carries moral overtones. I 
once asked my cousin, a distinguished lawyer, a question about a 
reference class: “What is the probability of the defendant winning in cases 
like this one?” His sharp answer that “every case is unique” was 
accompanied by a look that made it clear he found my question 
inappropriate and superficial. A proud emphasis on the uniqueness of 
cases is also common in medicine, in spite of recent advances in 
evidence-based medicine that point the other way. Medical statistics and 
baseline predictions come up with increasing frequency in conversations 
between patients and physicians. However, the remaining ambivalence 
about the outside view in the medical profession is expressed in concerns 
about the impersonality of procedures that are guided by statistics and 
checklists. 


The Planning Fallacy 

In light of both the outside-view forecast and the eventual outcome, the 
original estimates we made that Friday afternoon appear almost 
delusional. This should not come as a surprise: overly optimistic forecasts 
of the outcome of projects are found everywhere. Amos and I coined the 
term planning fallacy to describe plans and forecasts that 


• are unrealistically close to best-case scenarios 

• could be improved by consulting the statistics of similar cases 


Examples of the planning fallacy abound in the experiences of 
individuals, governments, and businesses. The list of horror stories is 
endless. 


• In July 1997, the proposed new Scottish Parliament building in 
Edinburgh was estimated to cost up to £40 million. By June 1999, 
the budget for the building was £109 million. In April 2000, legislators 
imposed a £195 million “cap on costs.” By November 2001, they 
demanded an estimate of “final cost,” which was set at £241 million. 
That estimated final cost rose twice in 2002, ending the year at 



£294.6 million. It rose three times more in 2003, reaching £375.8 
million by June. The building was finally comanspleted in 2004 at an 
ultimate cost of roughly £431 million. 

• A 2005 study examined rail projects undertaken worldwide between 
1969 and 1998. In more than 90% of the cases, the number of 
passengers projected to use the system was overestimated. Even 
though these passenger shortfalls were widely publicized, forecasts 
did not improve over those thirty years; on average, planners 
overestimated how many people would use the new rail projects by 
106%, and the average cost overrun was 45%. As more evidence 
accumulated, the experts did not become more reliant on it. 

• In 2002, a survey of American homeowners who had remodeled their 
kitchens found that, on average, they had expected the job to cost 
$18,658; in fact, they ended up paying an average of $38,769. 


The optimism of planners and decision makers is not the only cause of 
overruns. Contractors of kitchen renovations and of weapon systems 
readily admit (though not to their clients) that they routinely make most of 
their profit on additions to the original plan. The failures of forecasting in 
these cases reflect the customers’ inability to imagine how much their 
wishes will escalate over time. They end up paying much more than they 
would if they had made a realistic plan and stuck to it. 

Errors in the initial budget are not always innocent. The authors of 
unrealistic plans are often driven by the desire to get the plan approved— 
whether by their superiors or by a client—supported by the knowledge that 
projects are rarely abandoned unfinished merely because of overruns in 
costs or completion times. In such cases, the greatest responsibility for 
avoiding the planning fallacy lies with the decision makers who approve 
the plan. If they do not recognize the need for an outside view, they commit 
a planning fallacy. 

Mitigating the Planning Fallacy 

The diagnosis of and the remedy for the planning fallacy have not changed 
since that Friday afternoon, but the implementation of the idea has come a 
long way. The renowned Danish planning expert Bent Flyvbjerg, now at 
Oxford University, offered a forceful summary: 

The prevalent tendency to underweight or ignore distributional 
information is perhaps the major source of error in forecasting. 
Planners should therefore make every effort to frame the 



forecasting problem so as to facilitate utilizing all the 
distributional information that is available. 


This may be considered the single most important piece of advice 
regarding how to increase accuracy in forecasting through improved 
methods. Using such distributional information from other ventures similar 
to that being forecasted is called taking an “outside view” and is the cure to 
the planning fallacy. 

The treatment for the planning fallacy has now acquired a technical 
name, reference class forecasting, and Flyvbjerg has applied it to 
transportation projects in several countries. The outside view is 
implemented by using a large database, which provides information on 
both plans and outcomes for hundreds of projects all over the world, and 
can be used to provide statistical information about the likely overruns of 
cost and time, and about the likely underperformance of projects of 
different types. 

The forecasting method that Flyvbjerg applies is similar to the practices 
recommended for overcoming base-rate neglect: 


1. Identify an appropriate reference class (kitchen renovations, large 
railway projects, etc.). 

2. Obtain the statistics of the reference class (in terms of cost per mile 
of railway, or of the percentage by which expenditures exceeded 
budget). Use the statistics to generate a baseline prediction. 

3. Use specific information about the case to adjust the baseline 
prediction, if there are particular reasons to expect the optimistic 
bias to be more or less pronounced in this project than in others of 
the same type. 


Flyvbjerg’s analyses are intended to guide the authorities that commission 
public projects, by providing the statistics of overruns in similar projects. 
Decision makers need a realistic assessment of the costs and benefits of 
a proposal before making the final decision to approve it. They may also 
wish to estimate the budget reserve that they need in anticipation of 
overruns, although such precautions often become self-fulfilling 
prophecies. As one official told Flyvbjerg, “A budget reserve is to 
contractors as red meat is to lions, and they will devour it.” 

Organizations face the challenge of controlling the tendency of 
executives competing for resources to present overly optimistic plans. A 
well-run organization will reward planners for precise execution and 



penalize them for failing to anticipate difficulties, and for failing to allow for 
difficulties that they could not have anticipated—the unknown unknowns. 

Decisions and Errors 

That Friday afternoon occurred more than thirty years ago. I often thought 
about it and mentioned it in lectures several times each year. Some of my 
friends got bored with the story, but I kept drawing new lessons from it. 
Almost fifteen years after I first reported on the planning fallacy with Amos, I 
returned to the topic with Dan Lovallo. Together we sketched a theory of 
decision making in which the optimistic bias is a significant source of risk 
taking. In the standard rational model of economics, people take risks 
because the odds are favorable—they accept some probability of a costly 
failure because the probability of success is sufficient. We proposed an 
alternative idea. 

When forecasting the outcomes of risky projects, executives too easily 
fall victim to the planning fallacy. In its grip, they make decisions based on 
delusional optimism rather than on a rational weighting of gains, losses, 
and probabilities. They overestimate benefits and underestimate costs. 
They spin scenarios of success while overlooking the potential for 
mistakes and miscalculations. As a result, they pursue initiatives that are 
unlikely to come in on budget or on time or to deliver the expected returns 
—or even to be completed. 

In this view, people often (but not always) take on risky projects because 
they are overly optimistic about the odds they face. I will return to this idea 
several times in this book—it probably contributes to an explanation of why 
people litigate, why they start wars, and why they open small businesses. 

Failing a Test 

For many years, I thought that the main point of the curriculum story was 
what I had learned about my friend Seymour: that his best guess about the 
future of our project was not informed by what he knew about similar 
projects. I came off quite well in my telling of the story, ir In which I had the 
role of clever questioner and astute psychologist. I only recently realized 
that I had actually played the roles of chief dunce and inept leader. 

The project was my initiative, and it was therefore my responsibility to 
ensure that it made sense and that major problems were properly 
discussed by the team, but I failed that test. My problem was no longer the 
planning fallacy. I was cured of that fallacy as soon as I heard Seymour’s 
statistical summary. If pressed, I would have said that our earlier estimates 



had been absurdly optimistic. If pressed further, I would have admitted that 
we had started the project on faulty premises and that we should at least 
consider seriously the option of declaring defeat and going home. But 
nobody pressed me and there was no discussion; we tacitly agreed to go 
on without an explicit forecast of how long the effort would last. This was 
easy to do because we had not made such a forecast to begin with. If we 
had had a reasonable baseline prediction when we started, we would not 
have gone into it, but we had already invested a great deal of effort—an 
instance of the sunk-cost fallacy, which we will look at more closely in the 
next part of the book. It would have been embarrassing for us—especially 
for me—to give up at that point, and there seemed to be no immediate 
reason to do so. It is easier to change directions in a crisis, but this was 
not a crisis, only some new facts about people we did not know. The 
outside view was much easier to ignore than bad news in our own effort. I 
can best describe our state as a form of lethargy—an unwillingness to think 
about what had happened. So we carried on. There was no further attempt 
at rational planning for the rest of the time I spent as a member of the team 
—a particularly troubling omission for a team dedicated to teaching 
rationality. I hope I am wiser today, and I have acquired a habit of looking 
for the outside view. But it will never be the natural thing to do. 

Speaking of the Outside View 


“He’s taking an inside view. He should forget about his own case 
and look for what happened in other cases.” 


“She is the victim of a planning fallacy. She’s assuming a best- 
case scenario, but there are too many different ways for the plan 
to fail, and she cannot foresee them all.” 


“Suppose you did not know a thing about this particular legal 
case, only that it involves a malpractice claim by an individual 
against a surgeon. What would be your baseline prediction? How 
many of these cases succeed in court? How many settle? What 
are the amounts? Is the case we are discussing stronger or 
weaker than similar claims?” 


“We are making an additional investment because we do not 



want to admit failure. This is an instance of the sunk-cost fallacy.” 



The Engine of Capitalism 


The planning fallacy is only one of the manifestations of a pervasive 
optimistic bias, sid to adtions of aMost of us view the world as more 
benign than it really is, our own attributes as more favorable than they truly 
are, and the goals we adopt as more achievable than they are likely to be. 
We also tend to exaggerate our ability to forecast the future, which fosters 
optimistic overconfidence. In terms of its consequences for decisions, the 
optimistic bias may well be the most significant of the cognitive biases. 
Because optimistic bias can be both a blessing and a risk, you should be 
both happy and wary if you are temperamentally optimistic. 

Optimists 

Optimism is normal, but some fortunate people are more optimistic than 
the rest of us. If you are genetically endowed with an optimistic bias, you 
hardly need to be told that you are a lucky person—you already feel 
fortunate. An optimistic attitude is largely inherited, and it is part of a 
general disposition for well-being, which may also include a preference for 
seeing the bright side of everything. If you were allowed one wish for your 
child, seriously consider wishing him or her optimism. Optimists are 
normally cheerful and happy, and therefore popular; they are resilient in 
adapting to failures and hardships, their chances of clinical depression are 
reduced, their immune system is stronger, they take better care of their 
health, they feel healthier than others and are in fact likely to live longer. A 
study of people who exaggerate their expected life span beyond actuarial 
predictions showed that they work longer hours, are more optimistic about 
their future income, are more likely to remarry after divorce (the classic 
“triumph of hope over experience”), and are more prone to bet on 
individual stocks. Of course, the blessings of optimism are offered only to 
individuals who are only mildly biased and who are able to “accentuate the 
positive” without losing track of reality. 

Optimistic individuals play a disproportionate role in shaping our lives. 
Their decisions make a difference; they are the inventors, the 
entrepreneurs, the political and military leaders—not average people. They 
got to where they are by seeking challenges and taking risks. They are 
talented and they have been lucky, almost certainly luckier than they 
acknowledge. They are probably optimistic by temperament; a survey of 
founders of small businesses concluded that entrepreneurs are more 
sanguine than midlevel managers about life in general. Their experiences 
of success have confirmed their faith in their judgment and in their ability to 



control events. Their self-confidence is reinforced by the admiration of 
others. This reasoning leads to a hypothesis: the people who have the 
greatest influence on the lives of others are likely to be optimistic and 
overconfident, and to take more risks than they realize. 


The evidence suggests that an optimistic bias plays a role—sometimes 
the dominant role—whenever individuals or institutions voluntarily take on 
significant risks. More often than not, risk takers underestimate the odds 
they face, and do invest sufficient effort to find out what the odds are. 
Because they misread the risks, optimistic entrepreneurs often believe 
they are prudent, even when they are not. Their confidence in their future 
success sustains a positive mood that helps them obtain resources from 
others, raise the morale of their employees, and enhance their prospects 
of prevailing. When action is needed, optimism, even of the mildly 
delusional variety, may be a good thing. 

Entrepreneurial Delusions 

The chances that a small business will thesurvive for five years in the 
United States are about 35%. But the individuals who open such 
businesses do not believe that the statistics apply to them. A survey found 
that American entrepreneurs tend to believe they are in a promising line of 
business: their average estimate of the chances of success for “any 
business like yours” was 60%—almost double the true value. The bias was 
more glaring when people assessed the odds of their own venture. Fully 
81 % of the entrepreneurs put their personal odds of success at 7 out of 10 
or higher, and 33% said their chance of failing was zero. 

The direction of the bias is not surprising. If you interviewed someone 
who recently opened an Italian restaurant, you would not expect her to have 
underestimated her prospects for success or to have a poor view of her 
ability as a restaurateur. But you must wonder: Would she still have 
invested money and time if she had made a reasonable effort to learn the 
odds—or, if she did learn the odds (60% of new restaurants are out of 
business after three years), paid attention to them? The idea of adopting 
the outside view probably didn’t occur to her. 

One of the benefits of an optimistic temperament is that it encourages 
persistence in the face of obstacles. But persistence can be costly. An 
impressive series of studies by Thomas Astebro sheds light on what 
happens when optimists receive bad news. He drew his data from a 
Canadian organization—the Inventor’s Assistance Program—which 



collects a small fee to provide inventors with an objective assessment of 
the commercial prospects of their idea. The evaluations rely on careful 
ratings of each invention on 37 criteria, including need for the product, cost 
of production, and estimated trend of demand. The analysts summarize 
their ratings by a letter grade, where D and E predict failure—a prediction 
made for over 70% of the inventions they review. The forecasts of failure 
are remarkably accurate: only 5 of 411 projects that were given the lowest 
grade reached commercialization, and none was successful. 

Discouraging news led about half of the inventors to quit after receiving 
a grade that unequivocally predicted failure. However, 47% of them 
continued development efforts even after being told that their project was 
hopeless, and on average these persistent (or obstinate) individuals 
doubled their initial losses before giving up. Significantly, persistence after 
discouraging advice was relatively common among inventors who had a 
high score on a personality measure of optimism—on which inventors 
generally scored higher than the general population. Overall, the return on 
private invention was small, “lower than the return on private equity and on 
high-risk securities.” More generally, the financial benefits of self- 
employment are mediocre: given the same qualifications, people achieve 
higher average returns by selling their skills to employers than by setting 
out on their own. The evidence suggests that optimism is widespread, 
stubborn, and costly. 

Psychologists have confirmed that most people genuinely believe that 
they are superior to most others on most desirable traits—they are willing 
to bet small amounts of money on these beliefs in the laboratory. In the 
market, of course, beliefs in one’s superiority have significant 
consequences. Leaders of large businesses sometimes make huge bets 
in expensive mergers and acquisitions, acting on the mistaken belief that 
they can manage the assets of another company better than its current 
owners do. The stock market commonly responds by downgrading the 
value of the acquiring firm, because experience has shown that efforts to 
integrate large firms fail more often than they succeed. The misguided 
acquisitions have been explained by a “hubris hypothesis”: the eiv 
xecutives of the acquiring firm are simply less competent than they think 
they are. 

The economists Ulrike Malmendier and Geoffrey Tate identified 
optimistic CEOs by the amount of company stock that they owned 
personally and observed that highly optimistic leaders took excessive 
risks. They assumed debt rather than issue equity and were more likely 
than others to “overpay for target companies and undertake value- 
destroying mergers.” Remarkably, the stock of the acquiring company 
suffered substantially more in mergers if the CEO was overly optimistic by 



the authors’ measure. The stock market is apparently able to identify 
overconfident CEOs. This observation exonerates the CEOs from one 
accusation even as it convicts them of another: the leaders of enterprises 
who make unsound bets do not do so because they are betting with other 
people’s money. On the contrary, they take greater risks when they 
personally have more at stake. The damage caused by overconfident 
CEOs is compounded when the business press anoints them as 
celebrities; the evidence indicates that prestigious press awards to the 
CEO are costly to stockholders. The authors write, “We find that firms with 
award-winning CEOs subsequently underperform, in terms both of stock 
and of operating performance. At the same time, CEO compensation 
increases, CEOs spend more time on activities outside the company such 
as writing books and sitting on outside boards, and they are more likely to 
engage in earnings management.” 


Many years ago, my wife and I were on vacation on Vancouver Island, 
looking for a place to stay. We found an attractive but deserted motel on a 
little-traveled road in the middle of a forest. The owners were a charming 
young couple who needed little prompting to tell us their story. They had 
been schoolteachers in the province of Alberta; they had decided to 
change their life and used their life savings to buy this motel, which had 
been built a dozen years earlier. They told us without irony or self- 
consciousness that they had been able to buy it cheap, “because six or 
seven previous owners had failed to make a go of it.” They also told us 
about plans to seek a loan to make the establishment more attractive by 
building a restaurant next to it. They felt no need to explain why they 
expected to succeed where six or seven others had failed. A common 
thread of boldness and optimism links businesspeople, from motel owners 
to superstar CEOs. 

The optimistic risk taking of entrepreneurs surely contributes to the 
economic dynamism of a capitalistic society, even if most risk takers end 
up disappointed. However, Marta Coelho of the London School of 
Economics has pointed out the difficult policy issues that arise when 
founders of small businesses ask the government to support them in 
decisions that are most likely to end badly. Should the government provide 
loans to would-be entrepreneurs who probably will bankrupt themselves in 
a few years? Many behavioral economists are comfortable with the 
“libertarian paternalistic” procedures that help people increase their 
savings rate beyond what they would do on their own. The question of 
whether and how government should support small business does not have 



an equally satisfying answer. 


Competition Neglect 

It is tempting to explain entrepreneurial optimism by wishful thinking, but 
emotion is only part of the story. Cognitive biases play an important role, 
notably the System 1 feature WYSIATI. 


• We focus on our goal, anchor on our plan, and neglect relevant base 
rates, exposing ourselves to tnesehe planning fallacy. 

• We focus on what we want to do and can do, neglecting the plans 
and skills of others. 

• Both in explaining the past and in predicting the future, we focus on 
the causal role of skill and neglect the role of luck. We are therefore 
prone to an illusion of control. 

• We focus on what we know and neglect what we do not know, which 
makes us overly confident in our beliefs. 


The observation that “90% of drivers believe they are better than 
average” is a well-established psychological finding that has become part 
of the culture, and it often comes up as a prime example of a more general 
above-average effect. However, the interpretation of the finding has 
changed in recent years, from self-aggrandizement to a cognitive bias. 
Consider these two questions: 

Are you a good driver? 

Are you better than average as a driver? 

The first question is easy and the answer comes quickly: most drivers say 
yes. The second question is much harder and for most respondents almost 
impossible to answer seriously and correctly, because it requires an 
assessment of the average quality of drivers. At this point in the book it 
comes as no surprise that people respond to a difficult question by 
answering an easier one. They compare themselves to the average 
without ever thinking about the average. The evidence for the cognitive 
interpretation of the above-average effect is that when people are asked 
about a task they find difficult (for many of us this could be “Are you better 
than average in starting conversations with strangers?”), they readily rate 
themselves as below average. The upshot is that people tend to be overly 



optimistic about their relative standing on any activity in which they do 
moderately well. 

I have had several occasions to ask founders and participants in 
innovative start-ups a question: To what extent will the outcome of your 
effort depend on what you do in your firm? This is evidently an easy 
question; the answer comes quickly and in my small sample it has never 
been less than 80%. Even when they are not sure they will succeed, these 
bold people think their fate is almost entirely in their own hands. They are 
surely wrong: the outcome of a start-up depends as much on the 
achievements of its competitors and on changes in the market as on its 
own efforts. However, WY SIATI plays its part, and entrepreneurs naturally 
focus on what they know best—their plans and actions and the most 
immediate threats and opportunities, such as the availability of funding. 
They know less about their competitors and therefore find it natural to 
imagine a future in which the competition plays little part. 

Colin Camerer and Dan Lovallo, who coined the concept of competition 
neglect, illustrated it with a quote from the then chairman of Disney 
Studios. Asked why so many expensive big-budget movies are released 
on the same days (such as Memorial Day and Independence Day), he 
replied: 


Hubris. Hubris. If you only think about your own business, you 
think, “I’ve got a good story department, I’ve got a good 
marketing department, we’re going to go out and do this.” And 
you don’t think that everybody else is thinking the same way. In a 
given weekend in a year you’ll have five movies open, and there’s 
certainly not enough people to go around, re 

The candid answer refers to hubris, but it displays no arrogance, no 
conceit of superiority to competing studios. The competition is simply not 
part of the decision, in which a difficult question has again been replaced 
by an easier one. The question that needs an answer is this: Considering 
what others will do, how many people will see our film? The question the 
studio executives considered is simpler and refers to knowledge that is 
most easily available to them: Do we have a good film and a good 
organization to market it? The familiar System 1 processes of WY SIATI 
and substitution produce both competition neglect and the above-average 
effect. The consequence of competition neglect is excess entry: more 
competitors enter the market than the market can profitably sustain, so 
their average outcome is a loss. The outcome is disappointing for the 
typical entrant in the market, but the effect on the economy as a whole 
could well be positive. In fact, Giovanni Dosi and Dan Lovallo call 



entrepreneurial firms that fail but signal new markets to more qualified 
competitors “optimistic martyrs”—good for the economy but bad for their 
investors. 


Overconfidence 

For a number of years, professors at Duke University conducted a survey 
in which the chief financial officers of large corporations estimated the 
returns of the Standard &amp; Poor’s index over the following year. The Duke 
scholars collected 11,600 such forecasts and examined their accuracy. 
The conclusion was straightforward: financial officers of large corporations 
had no clue about the short-term future of the stock market; the correlation 
between their estimates and the true value was slightly less than zero! 
When they said the market would go down, it was slightly more likely than 
not that it would go up. These findings are not surprising. The truly bad 
news is that the CFOs did not appear to know that their forecasts were 
worthless. 

In addition to their best guess about S&amp;P returns, the participants 
provided two other estimates: a value that they were 90% sure would be 
too high, and one that they were 90% sure would be too low. The range 
between the two values is called an “80% confidence interval” and 
outcomes that fall outside the interval are labeled “surprises.” An individual 
who sets confidence intervals on multiple occasions expects about 20% of 
the outcomes to be surprises. As frequently happens in such exercises, 
there were far too many surprises; their incidence was 67%, more than 3 
times higher than expected. This shows that CFOs were grossly 
overconfident about their ability to forecast the market. Overconfidence is 
another manifestation of WYSIATI: when we estimate a quantity, we rely on 
information that comes to mind and construct a coherent story in which the 
estimate makes sense. Allowing for the information that does not come to 
mind—perhaps because one never knew it—is impossible. 

The authors calculated the confidence intervals that would have reduced 
the incidence of surprises to 20%. The results were striking. To maintain 
the rate of surprises at the desired level, the CFOs should have said, year 
after year, “There is an 80% chance that the S&amp;P return next year will be 
between -10% and +30%.” The confidence interval that properly reflects 
the CFOs’ knowledge (more precisely, their ignorance) is more than 4 
times wider than the intervals they actually stated. 

Social psychology comes into the picture here, because the answer that 
a truthful CFO would offer is plainly ridiculous. A CFO who informs his 
colleagues that “th%"&gt;iere is a good chance that the S&amp;P returns will be 



between -10% and +30%” can expect to be laughed out of the room. The 
wide confidence interval is a confession of ignorance, which is not socially 
acceptable for someone who is paid to be knowledgeable in financial 
matters. Even if they knew how little they know, the executives would be 
penalized for admitting it. President Truman famously asked for a “one- 
armed economist” who would take a clear stand; he was sick and tired of 
economists who kept saying, “On the other hand...” 

Organizations that take the word of overconfident experts can expect 
costly consequences. The study of CFOs showed that those who were 
most confident and optimistic about the S&amp;P index were also 
overconfident and optimistic about the prospects of their own firm, which 
went on to take more risk than others. As Nassim Taleb has argued, 
inadequate appreciation of the uncertainty of the environment inevitably 
leads economic agents to take risks they should avoid. However, optimism 
is highly valued, socially and in the market; people and firms reward the 
providers of dangerously misleading information more than they reward 
truth tellers. One of the lessons of the financial crisis that led to the Great 
Recession is that there are periods in which competition, among experts 
and among organizations, creates powerful forces that favor a collective 
blindness to risk and uncertainty. 

The social and economic pressures that favor overconfidence are not 
restricted to financial forecasting. Other professionals must deal with the 
fact that an expert worthy of the name is expected to display high 
confidence. Philip Tetlock observed that the most overconfident experts 
were the most likely to be invited to strut their stuff in news shows. 
Overconfidence also appears to be endemic in medicine. A study of 
patients who died in the ICU compared autopsy results with the diagnosis 
that physicians had provided while the patients were still alive. Physicians 
also reported their confidence. The result: “clinicians who were ‘completely 
certain’ of the diagnosis antemortem were wrong 40% of the time.” Here 
again, expert overconfidence is encouraged by their clients: “Generally, it 
is considered a weakness and a sign of vulnerability for clinicians to 
appear unsure. Confidence is valued over uncertainty and there is a 
prevailing censure against disclosing uncertainty to patients.” Experts who 
acknowledge the full extent of their ignorance may expect to be replaced 
by more confident competitors, who are better able to gain the trust of 
clients. An unbiased appreciation of uncertainty is a cornerstone of 
rationality—but it is not what people and organizations want. Extreme 
uncertainty is paralyzing under dangerous circumstances, and the 
admission that one is merely guessing is especially unacceptable when 
the stakes are high. Acting on pretended knowledge is often the preferred 
solution. 



When they come together, the emotional, cognitive, and social factors 
that support exaggerated optimism are a heady brew, which sometimes 
leads people to take risks that they would avoid if they knew the odds. 
There is no evidence that risk takers in the economic domain have an 
unusual appetite for gambles on high stakes; they are merely less aware of 
risks than more timid people are. Dan Lovallo and I coined the phrase 
“bold forecasts and timid decisions” to describe the background of risk 
taking. 


The effects of high optimism on decision making are, at best, a mixed 
blessing, but the contribution of optimism to good implementation is 
certainly positive. The main benefit of optimism is resilience in the face of 
setbacks. According to Martin Seligman, the founder of potelsitive 
psychology, an “optimistic explanation style” contributes to resilience by 
defending one’s self-image. In essence, the optimistic style involves taking 
credit for successes but little blame for failures. This style can be taught, at 
least to some extent, and Seligman has documented the effects of training 
on various occupations that are characterized by a high rate of failures, 
such as cold-call sales of insurance (a common pursuit in pre-Internet 
days). When one has just had a door slammed in one’s face by an angry 
homemaker, the thought that “she was an awful woman” is clearly superior 
to “I am an inept salesperson.” I have always believed that scientific 
research is another domain where a form of optimism is essential to 
success: I have yet to meet a successful scientist who lacks the ability to 
ex
aggerate the importance of what he or she is doing, and I believe that 
someone who lacks a delusional sense of significance will wilt in the face 
of repeated experiences of multiple small failures and rare successes, the 
fate of most researchers. 

The Premortem: A Partial Remedy 

Can overconfident optimism be overcome by training? I am not optimistic. 
There have been numerous attempts to train people to state confidence 
intervals that reflect the imprecision of their judgments, with only a few 
reports of modest success. An often cited example is that geologists at 
Royal Dutch Shell became less overconfident in their assessments of 
possible drilling sites after training with multiple past cases for which the 
outcome was known. In other situations, overconfidence was mitigated (but 
not eliminated) when judges were encouraged to consider competing 
hypotheses. However, overconfidence is a direct consequence of features 



of System 1 that can be tamed—but not vanquished. The main obstacle is 
that subjective confidence is determined by the coherence of the story one 
has constructed, not by the quality and amount of the information that 
supports it. 

Organizations may be better able to tame optimism and individuals than 
individuals are. The best idea for doing so was contributed by Gary Klein, 
my “adversarial collaborator” who generally defends intuitive decision 
making against claims of bias and is typically hostile to algorithms. He 
labels his proposal the premortem. The procedure is simple: when the 
organization has almost come to an important decision but has not formally 
committed itself, Klein proposes gathering for a brief session a group of 
individuals who are knowledgeable about the decision. The premise of the 
session is a short speech: “Imagine that we are a year into the future. We 
implemented the plan as it now exists. The outcome was a disaster. 
Please take 5 to 10 minutes to write a brief history of that disaster.” 

Gary Klein’s idea of the premortem usually evokes immediate 
enthusiasm. After I described it casually at a session in Davos, someone 
behind me muttered, “It was worth coming to Davos just for this!” (I later 
noticed that the speaker was the CEO of a major international 
corporation.) The premortem has two main advantages: it overcomes the 
groupthink that affects many teams once a decision appears to have been 
made, and it unleashes the imagination of knowledgeable individuals in a 
much-needed direction. 

As a team converges on a decision—and especially when the leader 
tips her hand—public doubts about the wisdom of the planned move are 
gradually suppressed and eventually come to be treated as evidence of 
flawed loyalty to the team and its leaders. The suppression of doubt 
contributes to overconfidence in a group where only supporters of the 
decision have a v filepos-id="filepos726557"&gt; nacea and does not 
provide complete protection against nasty surprises, but it goes some way 
toward reducing the damage of plans that are subject to the biases of WY 
SIATI and uncritical optimism. 

Speaking of Optimism 


“They have an illusion of control. They seriously underestimate the 
obstacles.” 


“They seem to suffer from an acute case of competitor neglect.” 



“This is a case of overconfidence. They seem to believe they 
know more than they actually do know.” 


“We should conduct a premortem session. Someone may come 
up with a threat we have neglected.” 



Part 4 



Choices 



Bernoulli’s Errors 


One day in the early 1970s, Amos handed me a mimeographed essay by 
a Swiss economist named Bruno Frey, which discussed the psychological 
assumptions of economic theory. I vividly remember the color of the cover: 
dark red. Bruno Frey barely recalls writing the piece, but I can still recite its 
first sentence: “The agent of economic theory is rational, selfish, and his 
tastes do not change.” 

I was astonished. My economist colleagues worked in the building next 
door, but I had not appreciated the profound difference between our 
intellectual worlds. To a psychologist, it is self-evident that people are 
neither fully rational nor completely selfish, and that their tastes are 
anything but stable. Our two disciplines seemed to be studying different 
species, which the behavioral economist Richard Thaler later dubbed 
Econs and Humans. 

Unlike Econs, the Humans that psychologists know have a System 1. 
Their view of the world is limited by the information that is available at a 
given moment (WYSIATI), and therefore they cannot be as consistent and 
logical as Econs. They are sometimes generous and often willing to 
contribute to the group to which they are attached. And they often have little 
idea of what they will like next year or even tomorrow. Here was an 
opportunity for an interesting conversation across the boundaries of the 
disciplines. I did not anticipate that my career would be defined by that 
conversation. 

Soon after he showed me Frey’s article, Amos suggested that we make 
the study of decision making our next project. I knew next to nothing about 
the topic, but Amos was an expert and a star of the field, and he 
Mathematical Psychology, and he directed me to a few chapters that he 
thought would be a good introduction. 

I soon learned that our subject matter would be people’s attitudes to 
risky options and that we would seek to answer a specific question: What 
rules govern people’s choices between different simple gambles and 
between gambles and sure things? 

Simple gambles (such as “40% chance to win $300”) are to students of 
decision making what the fruit fly is to geneticists. Choices between such 
gambles provide a simple model that shares important features with the 
more complex decisions that researchers actually aim to understand. 
Gambles represent the fact that the consequences of choices are never 
certain. Even ostensibly sure outcomes are uncertain: when you sign the 
contract to buy an apartment, you do not know the price at which you later 
may have to sell it, nor do you know that your neighbor’s son will soon take 



up the tuba. Every significant choice we make in life comes with some 
uncertainty—which is why students of decision making hope that some of 
the lessons learned in the model situation will be applicable to more 
interesting everyday problems. But of course the main reason that decision 
theorists study simple gambles is that this is what other decision theorists 
do. 

The field had a theory, expected utility theory, which was the foundation 
of the rational-agent model and is to this day the most important theory in 
the social sciences. Expected utility theory was not intended as a 
psychological model; it was a logic of choice, based on elementary rules 
(axioms) of rationality. Consider this example: 

If you prefer an apple to a banana, 
then 

you also prefer a 10% chance to win an apple to a 10% chance 
to win a banana. 

The apple and the banana stand for any objects of choice (including 
gambles), and the 10% chance stands for any probability. The 
mathematician John von Neumann, one of the giant intellectual figures of 
the twentieth century, and the economist Oskar Morgenstern had derived 
their theory of rational choice between gambles from a few axioms. 
Economists adopted expected utility theory in a dual role: as a logic that 
prescribes how decisions should be made, and as a description of how 
Econs make choices. Amos and I were psychologists, however, and we 
set out to understand how Humans actually make risky choices, without 
assuming anything about their rationality. 

We maintained our routine of spending many hours each day in 
conversation, sometimes in our offices, sometimes at restaurants, often on 
long walks through the quiet streets of beautiful Jerusalem. As we had 
done when we studied judgment, we engaged in a careful examination of 
our own intuitive preferences. We spent our time inventing simple decision 
problems and asking ourselves how we would choose. For example: 

Which do you prefer? 

A. Toss a coin. If it comes up heads you win $100, and if it comes 
up tails you win nothing. 

B. Get $46 for sure. 

We were not trying to figure out the mos BineithWe t rational or 
advantageous choice; we wanted to find the intuitive choice, the one that 
appeared immediately tempting. We almost always selected the same 



option. In this example, both of us would have picked the sure thing, and 
you probably would do the same. When we confidently agreed on a choice, 
we believed—almost always correctly, as it turned out—that most people 
would share our preference, and we moved on as if we had solid evidence. 
We knew, of course, that we would need to verify our hunches later, but by 
playing the roles of both experimenters and subjects we were able to move 
quickly. 

Five years after we began our study of gambles, we finally completed an 
essay that we titled “Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision under Risk.” 
Our theory was closely modeled on utility theory but departed from it in 
fundamental ways. Most important, our model was purely descriptive, and 
its goal was to document and explain systematic violations of the axioms 
of rationality in choices between gambles. We submitted our essay to 
Econometrics, a journal that publishes significant theoretical articles in 
economics and in decision theory. The choice of venue turned out to be 
important; if we had published the identical paper in a psychological 
journal, it would likely have had little impact on economics. However, our 
decision was not guided by a wish to influence economics; Econometrica 
just happened to be where the best papers on decision making had been 
published in the past, and we were aspiring to be in that company. In this 
choice as in many others, we were lucky. Prospect theory turned out to be 
the most significant work we ever did, and our article is among the most 
often cited in the social sciences. Two years later, we published in 
Science an account of framing effects: the large changes of preferences 
that are sometimes caused by inconsequential variations in the wording of 
a choice problem. 

During the first five years we spent looking at how people make 
decisions, we established a dozen facts about choices between risky 
options. Several of these facts were in flat contradiction to expected utility 
theory. Some had been observed before, a few were new. Then we 
constructed a theory that modified expected utility theory just enough to 
explain our collection of observations. That was prospect theory. 

Our approach to the problem was in the spirit of a field of psychology 
called psychophysics, which was founded and named by the German 
psychologist and mystic Gustav Fechner (1801-1887). Fechner was 
obsessed with the relation of mind and matter. On one side there is a 
physical quantity that can vary, such as the energy of a light, the frequency 
of a tone, or an amount of money. On the other side there is a subjective 
experience of brightness, pitch, or value. Mysteriously, variations of the 
physical quantity cause variations in the intensity or quality of the subjective 
experience. Fechner’s project was to find the psychophysical laws that 



relate the subjective quantity in the observer’s mind to the objective 
quantity in the material world. He proposed that for many dimensions, the 
function is logarithmic—which simply means that an increase of stimulus 
intensity by a given factor (say, times 1.5 or times 10) always yields the 
same increment on the psychological scale. If raising the energy of the 
sound from 10 to 100 units of physical energy increases psychological 
intensity by 4 units, then a further increase of stimulus intensity from 100 to 
1,000 will also increase psychological intensity by 4 units. 

Bernoulli’s Error 

As Fechner well knew, he was not the first to look for a function that rel 
Binepitze="4"&gt;t/tf//fy) and the actual amount of money. He argued that a 
gift of 10 ducats has the same utility to someone who already has 100 
ducats as a gift of 20 ducats to someone whose current wealth is 200 
ducats. Bernoulli was right, of course: we normally speak of changes of 
income in terms of percentages, as when we say “she got a 30% raise.” 
The idea is that a 30% raise may evoke a fairly similar psychological 
response for the rich and for the poor, which an increase of $100 will not 
do. As in Fechner’s law, the psychological response to a change of wealth 
is inversely proportional to the initial amount of wealth, leading to the 
conclusion that utility is a logarithmic function of wealth. If this function is 
accurate, the same psychological distance separates $100,000 from $1 
million, and $10 million from $100 million. 

Bernoulli drew on his psychological insight into the utility of wealth to 
propose a radically new approach to the evaluation of gambles, an 
important topic for the mathematicians of his day. Prior to Bernoulli, 
mathematicians had assumed that gambles are assessed by their 
expected value: a weighted average of the possible outcomes, where 
each outcome is weighted by its probability. For example, the expected 
value of: 


80% chance to win $100 and 20% chance to win $10 is $82 (0.8 
x 100+ 0.2x10). 

Now ask yourself this question: Which would you prefer to receive as a gift, 
this gamble or $80 for sure? Almost everyone prefers the sure thing. If 
people valued uncertain prospects by their expected value, they would 
prefer the gamble, because $82 is more than $80. Bernoulli pointed out 
that people do not in fact evaluate gambles in this way. 

Bernoulli observed that most people dislike risk (the chance of receiving 
the lowest possible outcome), and if they are offered a choice between a 



gamble and an amount equal to its expected value they will pick the sure 
thing. In fact a risk-averse decision maker will choose a sure thing that is 
less than expected value, in effect paying a premium to avoid the 
uncertainty. One hundred years before Fechner, Bernoulli invented 
psychophysics to explain this aversion to risk. His idea was 
straightforward: people’s choices are based not on dollar values but on the 
psychological values of outcomes, their utilities. The psychological value of 
a gamble is therefore not the weighted average of its possible dollar 
outcomes; it is the average of the utilities of these outcomes, each 
weighted by its probability. 

Table 3 shows a version of the utility function that Bernoulli calculated; it 
presents the utility of different levels of wealth, from 1 million to 10 million. 

You can see that adding 1 million to a wealth of 1 million yields an 
increment of 20 utility points, but adding 1 million to a wealth of 9 million 
adds only 4 points. Bernoulli proposed that the diminishing marginal value 
of wealth (in the modern jargon) is what explains risk aversion—the 
common preference that people generally show for a sure thing over a 
favorable gamble of equal or slightly higher expected value. Consider this 
choice: 

Wealth (millions) 123456789 10 

Utility units 10 30 48 60 70 78 84 90 96 100 

Table 3 

Equal chances to have 1 million or 7 million Utility: (10 + 84)/2 = 47 

OR 

Have 4 million with certainty Utility: 60 

The expected value of the gamble and the “sure thing” are equal in ducats 
(4 million), but the psychological utilities of the two options are different, 
because of the diminishing utility of wealth: the increment of utility from 1 
million to 4 million is 50 units, but an equal increment, from 4 to 7 million, 
increases the utility of wealth by only 24 units. The utility of the gamble is 
94/2 = 47 (the utility of its two outcomes, each weighted by its probability of 
1/2). The utility of 4 million is 60. Because 60 is more than 47, an individual 
with this utility function will prefer the sure thing. Bernoulli’s insight was that 
a decision maker with diminishing marginal utility for wealth will be risk 
averse. 

Bernoulli’s essay is a marvel of concise brilliance. He applied his new 



concept of expected utility (which he called “moral expectation”) to 
compute how much a merchant in St. Petersburg would be willing to pay to 
insure a shipment of spice from Amsterdam if “he is well aware of the fact 
that at this time of year of one hundred ships which sail from Amsterdam to 
Petersburg, five are usually lost.” His utility function explained why poor 
people buy insurance and why richer people sell it to them. As you can see 
in the table, the loss of 1 million causes a loss of 4 points of utility (from 
100 to 96) to someone who has 10 million and a much larger loss of 18 
points (from 48 to 30) to someone who starts off with 3 million. The poorer 
man will happily pay a premium to transfer the risk to the richer one, which 
is what insurance is about. Bernoulli also offered a solution to the famous 
“St. Petersburg paradox,” in which people who are offered a gamble that 
has infinite expected value (in ducats) are willing to spend only a few 
ducats for it. Most impressive, his analysis of risk attitudes in terms of 
preferences for wealth has stood the test of time: it is still current in 
economic analysis almost 300 years later. 

The longevity of the theory is all the more remarkable because it is 
seriously flawed. The errors of a theory are rarely found in what it asserts 
explicitly; they hide in what it ignores or tacitly assumes. For an example, 
take the following scenarios: 

Today Jack and Jill each have a wealth of 5 million. 

Yesterday, Jack had 1 million and Jill had 9 million. 

Are they equally happy? (Do they have the same utility?) 

Bernoulli’s theory assumes that the utility of their wealth is what makes 
people more or less happy. Jack and Jill have the same wealth, and the 
theory therefore asserts that they should be equally happy, but you do not 
need a degree in psychology to know that today Jack is elated and Jill 
despondent. Indeed, we know that Jack would be a great deal happier 
than Jill even if he had only 2 million today while she has 5. So Bernoulli’s 
theory must be wrong. 

The happiness that Jack and Jill experience is determined by the recent 
change in their wealth, relative to the different states of wealth that define 
their reference points (1 million for Jack, 9 million for Jill). This reference 
dependence is ubiquitous in sensation and perception. The same sound 
will be experienced as very loud or quite faint, depending on whether it was 
preceded by a whisper or by a roar. To predict the subjective experience 
of loudness, it is not enough to know its absolute energy; you also need to 
Bineli&amp;r quite fa know the reference sound to which it is automatically 
compared. Similarly, you need to know about the background before you 
can predict whether a gray patch on a page will appear dark or light. And 



you need to know the reference before you can predict the utility of an 
amount of wealth. 

For another example of what Bernoulli’s theory misses, consider 
Anthony and Betty: 

Anthony’s current wealth is 1 million. 

Betty’s current wealth is 4 million. 

They are both offered a choice between a gamble and a sure thing. 

The gamble: equal chances to end up owning 1 million or 4 

million 

OR 

The sure thing: own 2 million for sure 

In Bernoulli’s account, Anthony and Betty face the same choice: their 
expected wealth will be 2.5 million if they take the gamble and 2 million if 
they prefer the sure-thing option. Bernoulli would therefore expect Anthony 
and Betty to make the same choice, but this prediction is incorrect. Here 
again, the theory fails because it does not allow for the different reference 
points from which Anthony and Betty consider their options. If you imagine 
yourself in Anthony’s and Betty’s shoes, you will quickly see that current 
wealth matters a great deal. Here is how they may think: 

Anthony (who currently owns 1 million): “If I choose the sure thing, 
my wealth will double with certainty. This is very attractive. 
Alternatively, I can take a gamble with equal chances to 
quadruple my wealth or to gain nothing.” 


Betty (who currently owns 4 million): “If I choose the sure thing, I 
lose half of my wealth with certainty, which is awful. Alternatively, I 
can take a gamble with equal chances to lose three-quarters of 
my wealth or to lose nothing.” 

\bu can sense that Anthony and Betty are likely to make different 
choices because the sure-thing option of owning 2 million makes Anthony 
happy and makes Betty miserable. Note also how the sure outcome differs 
from the v\orst outcome of the gamble: for Anthony, it is the difference 
between doubling his wealth and gaining nothing; for Betty, it is the 
difference between losing half her wealth and losing three-quarters of it. 
Betty is much more likely to take her chances, as others do when faced 



with very bad options. As I have told their story, neither Anthony nor Betty 
thinks in terms of states of wealth: Anthony thinks of gains and Betty thinks 
of losses. The psychological outcomes they assess are entirely different, 
although the possible states of wealth they face are the same. 

Because Bernoulli’s model lacks the idea of a reference point, expected 
utility theory does not represent the obvious fact that the outcome that is 
good for Anthony is bad for Betty. His model could explain Anthony’s risk 
aversion, but it cannot explain Betty’s risk-seeking preference for the 
gamble, a behavior that is often observed in entrepreneurs and in generals 
when all their options are bad. 

All this is rather obvious, isn’t it? One could easily imagine Bernoulli 
himself constructing similar examples and developing a more complex 
theory to accommodate them; for some reason, he did not. One could also 
imagine colleagues of his time disagreeing with him, or later scholars 
objecting as they read his essay; for some reason, they did not either. 

The mystery is how a conception of the utility of outcomes that is 
vulnerable to such obvious counterexamples survived for so long. I can 
explain it only by a weakness of the scholarly mind that I have often 
observed in myself. I call it theory-induced blindness: once you have 
accepted a theory and used it as a tool in your thinking, it is extraordinarily 
difficult to notice its flaws. If you come upon an observation that does not 
seem to fit the model, you assume that there must be a perfectly good 
explanation that you are somehow missing. You give the theory the benefit 
of the doubt, trusting the community of experts who have accepted it. Many 
scholars have surely thought at one time or another of stories such as 
those of Anthony and Betty, or Jack and Jill, and casually noted that these 
stories did not jibe with utility theory. But they did not pursue the idea to the 
point of saying, “This theory is seriously wrong because it ignores the fact 
that utility depends on the history of one’s wealth, not only on present 
wealth.” As the psychologist Daniel Gilbert observed, disbelieving is hard 
work, and System 2 is easily tired. 

Speaking of Bernoulli’s Errors 


“He was very happy with a $20,000 bonus three years ago, but 
his salary has gone up by 20% since, so he will need a higher 
bonus to get the same utility.” 


“Both candidates are willing to accept the salary we’re offering, 



but they won’t be equally satisfied because their reference points 
are different. She currently has a much higher salary.” 


“She’s suing him for alimony. She would actually like to settle, but 
he prefers to go to court. That’s not surprising—she can only 
gain, so she’s risk averse. He, on the other hand, faces options 
that are all bad, so he’d rather take the risk.” 



Prospect Theory 


Amos and I stumbled on the central flaw in Bernoulli’s theory by a lucky 
combination of skill and ignorance. At Amos’s suggestion, I read a chapter 
in his book that described experiments in which distinguished scholars 
had measured the utility of money by asking people to make choices about 
gambles in which the participant could win or lose a few pennies. The 
experimenters were measuring the utility of wealth, by modifying wealth 
within a range of less than a dollar. This raised questions. Is it plausible to 
assume that people evaluate the gambles by tiny differences in wealth? 
How could one hope to learn about the psychophysics of wealth by 
studying reactions to gains and losses of pennies? Recent developments 
in psychophysical theory suggested that if you want to study the subjective 
value of wealth, you shou Clth"ld ask direct questions about wealth, not 
about changes of wealth. I did not know enough about utility theory to be 
blinded by respect for it, and I was puzzled. 

When Amos and I met the next day, I reported my difficulties as a vague 
thought, not as a discovery. I fully expected him to set me straight and to 
explain why the experiment that had puzzled me made sense after all, but 
he did nothing of the kind—the relevance of the modern psychophysics 
was immediately obvious to him. He remembered that the economist Harry 
Markowitz, who would later earn the Nobel Prize for his work on finance, 
had proposed a theory in which utilities were attached to changes of 
wealth rather than to states of wealth. Markowitz’s idea had been around 
for a quarter of a century and had not attracted much attention, but we 
quickly concluded that this was the way to go, and that the theory we were 
planning to develop would define outcomes as gains and losses, not as 
states of wealth. Knowledge of perception and ignorance about decision 
theory both contributed to a large step forward in our research. 

We soon knew that we had overcome a serious case of theory-induced 
blindness, because the idea we had rejected now seemed not only false 
but absurd. We were amused to realize that we were unable to assess our 
current wealth within tens of thousands of dollars. The idea of deriving 
attitudes to small changes from the utility of wealth now seemed 
indefensible. You know you have made a theoretical advance when you 
can no longer reconstruct why you failed for so long to see the obvious. 
Still, it took us years to explore the implications of thinking about outcomes 
as gains and losses. 

In utility theory, the utility of a gain is assessed by comparing the utilities 
of two states of wealth. For example, the utility of getting an extra $500 
when your wealth is $1 million is the difference between the utility of 



$1,000,500 and the utility of $1 million. And if you own the larger amount, 
the disutility of losing $500 is again the difference between the utilities of 
the two states of wealth. In this theory, the utilities of gains and losses are 
allowed to differ only in their sign (+ or -). There is no way to represent the 
fact that the disutility of losing $500 could be greater than the utility of 
winning the same amount—though of course it is. As might be expected in 
a situation of theory-induced blindness, possible differences between 
gains and losses were neither expected nor studied. The distinction 
between gains and losses was assumed not to matter, so there was no 
point in examining it. 

Amos and I did not see immediately that our focus on changes of wealth 
opened the way to an exploration of a new topic. We were mainly 
concerned with differences between gambles with high or low probability 
of winning. One day, Amos made the casual suggestion, “How about 
losses?” and we quickly found that our familiar risk aversion was replaced 
by risk seeking when we switched our focus. Consider these two 
problems: 

Problem 1: Which do you choose? 

Get $900 for sure OR 90% chance to get $1,000 


Problem 2: Which do you choose? 

Lose $900 for sure OR 90% chance to lose $1,000 

You were probably risk averse in problem 1, as is the great majority of 
people. The subjective value of a gain of $900 is certainly more than 90% 
of the value of a ga Blth"it ue of a gin of $1,000. The risk-averse choice in 
this problem would not have surprised Bernoulli. 

Now examine your preference in problem 2. If you are like most other 
people, you chose the gamble in this question. The explanation for this 
risk-seeking choice is the mirror image of the explanation of risk aversion 
in problem 1: the (negative) value of losing $900 is much more than 90% of 
the (negative) value of losing $1,000. The sure loss is very aversive, and 
this drives you to take the risk. Later, we will see that the evaluations of the 
probabilities (90% versus 100%) also contributes to both risk aversion in 
problem 1 and the preference for the gamble in problem 2. 

We were not the first to notice that people become risk seeking when all 
their options are bad, but theory-induced blindness had prevailed. 
Because the dominant theory did not provide a plausible way to 
accommodate different attitudes to risk for gains and losses, the fact that 
the attitudes differed had to be ignored. In contrast, our decision to view 



outcomes as gains and losses led us to focus precisely on this 
discrepancy. The observation of contrasting attitudes to risk with favorable 
and unfavorable prospects soon yielded a significant advance: we found a 
way to demonstrate the central error in Bernoulli’s model of choice. Have a 
look: 


Problem 3: In addition to whatever you own, you have been given 

$ 1 , 000 . 

You are now asked to choose one of these options: 

50% chance to win $1,000 OR get $500 for sure 


Problem 4: In addition to whatever you own, you have been given 

$ 2 , 000 . 

You are now asked to choose one of these options: 

50% chance to lose $1,000 OR lose $500 for sure 

\bu can easily confirm that in terms of final states of wealth—all that 
matters for Bernoulli’s theory—problems 3 and 4 are identical. In both 
cases you have a choice between the same two options: you can have the 
certainty of being richer than you currently are by $1,500, or accept a 
gamble in which you have equal chances to be richer by $1,000 or by 
$2,000. In Bernoulli’s theory, therefore, the two problems should elicit 
similar preferences. Check your intuitions, and you will probably guess 
what other people did. 


• In the first choice, a large majority of respondents preferred the sure 
thing. 

• In the second choice, a large majority preferred the gamble. 


The finding of different preferences in problems 3 and 4 was a decisive 
counterexample to the key idea of Bernoulli’s theory. If the utility of wealth is 
all that matters, then transparently equivalent statements of the same 
problem should yield identical choices. The comparison of the problems 
highlights the all-important role of the reference point from which the 
options are evaluated. The reference point is higher than current wealth by 
$1,000 in problem 3, by $2,000 in problem 4. Being richer by $1,500 is 
therefore a gain of $500 in problem 3 and a loss in problem 4. Obviously, 
other examples of the same kind are easy to generate. The story of 



Anthony and Betty had a similar structure. 

How much attention did you pay to the gift of $1,000 or $2,000 that 
you were “given” prior to making your choice? If you are like most people, 
you barely noticed it. Indeed, there was no reason for you to attend to it, 
because the gift is included in the reference point, and reference points 
are generally ignored. You know something about your preferences that 
utility theorists do not—that your attitudes to risk would not be different if 
your net worth were higher or lower by a few thousand dollars (unless you 
are abjectly poor). And you also know that your attitudes to gains and 
losses are not derived from your evaluation of your wealth. The reason you 
like the idea of gaining $100 and dislike the idea of losing $100 is not that 
these amounts change your wealth. You just like winning and dislike losing 
—and you almost certainly dislike losing more than you like winning. 

The four problems highlight the weakness of Bernoulli’s model. His 
theory is too simple and lacks a moving part. The missing variable is the 
reference point, the earlier state relative to which gains and losses are 
evaluated. In Bernoulli’s theory you need to know only the state of wealth to 
determine its utility, but in prospect theory you also need to know the 
reference state. Prospect theory is therefore more complex than utility 
theory. In science complexity is considered a cost, which must be justified 
by a sufficiently rich set of new and (preferably) interesting predictions of 
facts that the existing theory cannot explain. This was the challenge we had 
to meet. 

Although Amos and I were not working with the two-systems model of 
the mind, it’s clear now that there are three cognitive features at the heart 
of prospect theory. They play an essential role in the evaluation of financial 
outcomes and are common to many automatic processes of perception, 
judgment, and emotion. They should be seen as operating characteristics 
of System 1. 


• Evaluation is relative to a neutral reference point, which is 
sometimes referred to as an “adaptation level.” You can easily set up 
a compelling demonstration of this principle. Place three bowls of 
water in front of you. Put ice water into the left-hand bowl and warm 
water into the right-hand bowl. The water in the middle bowl should 
be at room temperature. Immerse your hands in the cold and warm 
water for about a minute, then dip both in the middle bowl. You will 
experience the same temperature as heat in one hand and cold in 
the other. For financial outcomes, the usual reference point is the 
status quo, but it can also be the outcome that you expect, or 



perhaps the outcome to which you feel entitled, for example, the 
raise or bonus that your colleagues receive. Outcomes that are 
better than the reference points are gains. Below the reference point 
they are losses. 

• A principle of diminishing sensitivity applies to both sensory 
dimensions and the evaluation of changes of wealth. Turning on a 
weak light has a large effect in a dark room. The same increment of 
light may be undetectable in a brightly illuminated room. Similarly, the 
subjective difference between $900 and $1,000 is much smaller than 
the difference between $100 and $200. 

• The third principle is loss aversion. When directly compared or 
weighted against each other, losses loom larger than gains. This 
asymmetry between the power of positive and negative expectations 
or experiences has an evolutionary history. Organisms that treat 
threats as more urgent than opportunities have a better chance to 
survive and reproduce. 


The three principles that govern the value of outcomes are illustrated by 
figure 1 Blth" wagure 0. If prospect theory had a flag, this image would be 
drawn on it. The graph shows the psychological value of gains and losses, 
which are the “carriers” of value in prospect theory (unlike Bernoulli’s 
model, in which states of wealth are the carriers of value). The graph has 
two distinct parts, to the right and to the left of a neutral reference point. A 
salient feature is that it is S-shaped, which represents diminishing 
sensitivity for both gains and losses. Finally, the two curves of the S are not 
symmetrical. The slope of the function changes abruptly at the reference 
point: the response to losses is stronger than the response to 
corresponding gains. This is loss aversion. 



+ 



LOSSES GAINS 


Figure 10 


Loss Aversion 

Many of the options we face in life are “mixed”: there is a risk of loss and 
an opportunity for gain, and we must decide whether to accept the gamble 
or reject it. Investors who evaluate a start-up, lawyers who wonder whether 
to file a lawsuit, wartime generals who consider an offensive, and 
politicians who must decide whether to run for office all face the 
possibilities of victory or defeat. For an elementary example of a mixed 
prospect, examine your reaction to the next question. 

Problem 5: You are offered a gamble on the toss of a coin. 

If the coin shows tails, you lose $100. 

If the coin shows heads, you win $150. 

Is this gamble attractive? Would you accept it? 

To make this choice, you must balance the psychological benefit of getting 
$150 against the psychological cost of losing $100. How do you feel about 
it? Although the expected value of the gamble is obviously positive, 












because you stand to gain more than you can lose, you probably dislike it 
—most people do. The rejection of this gamble is an act of System 2, but 
the critical inputs are emotional responses that are generated by System 
1. For most people, the fear of losing $100 is more intense than the hope 
of gaining $150. We concluded from many such observations that “losses 
loom larger than gains” and that people are loss averse. 

\bu can measure the extent of your aversion to losses by asking yourself 
a question: What is the smallest gain that I need to balance an equal 
chance to lose $100? For many people the answer is about $200, twice as 
much as the loss. The “loss aversion ratio” has been estimated in several 
experiments and is usually in the range of 1.5 to 2.5. This is an average, of 
course; some people are much more loss averse than others. Professional 
risk takers in the financial markets are more tolerant of losses, probably 
because they do not respond emotionally to every fluctuation. When 
participants in an experiment were instructed to “think like a trader,” they 
became less loss averse and their emotional reaction to losses (measured 
by a physiological index of emotional arousal) was sharply reduced. 

In order to examine your loss aversion ratio for different stakes, consider 
the following questions. Ignore any social considerations, do not try to 
appear either bold Blth"vioher or cautious, and focus only on the subjective 
impact of the possible loss and the offsetting gain. 


• Consider a 5 0-5 0 gamble in which you can lose $10. What is the 
smallest gain that makes the gamble attractive? If you say $10, then 
you are indifferent to risk. If you give a number less than $10, you 
seek risk. If your answer is above $10, you are loss averse. 

• What about a possible loss of $500 on a coin toss? What possible 
gain do you require to off set it? 

• What about a loss of $2,000? 


As you carried out this exercise, you probably found that your loss aversion 
coefficient tends to increase when the stakes rise, but not dramatically. All 
bets are off, of course, if the possible loss is potentially ruinous, or if your 
lifestyle is threatened. The loss aversion coefficient is very large in such 
cases and may even be infinite—there are risks that you will not accept, 
regardless of how many millions you might stand to win if you are lucky. 

Another look at figure 10 may help prevent a common confusion. In this 
chapter I have made two claims, which some readers may view as 
contradictory: 



• In mixed gambles, where both a gain and a loss are possible, loss 
aversion causes extremely risk-averse choices. 

• In bad choices, where a sure loss is compared to a larger loss that is 
merely probable, diminishing sensitivity causes risk seeking. 


There is no contradiction. In the mixed case, the possible loss looms twice 
as large as the possible gain, as you can see by comparing the slopes of 
the value function for losses and gains. In the bad case, the bending of the 
value curve (diminishing sensitivity) causes risk seeking. The pain of losing 
$900 is more than 90% of the pain of losing $1,000. These two insights 
are the essence of prospect theory. 


Figure 10 shows an abrupt change in the slope of the value function where 
gains turn into losses, because there is considerable loss aversion even 
when the amount at risk is minuscule relative to your wealth. Is it plausible 
that attitudes to states of wealth could explain the extreme aversion to 
small risks? It is a striking example of theory-induced blindness that this 
obvious flaw in Bernoulli’s theory failed to attract scholarly notice for more 
than 250 years. In 2000, the behavioral economist Matthew Rabin finally 
proved mathematically that attempts to explain loss aversion by the utility of 
wealth are absurd and doomed to fail, and his proof attracted attention. 
Rabin’s theorem shows that anyone who rejects a favorable gamble with 
small stakes is mathematically committed to a foolish level of risk aversion 
for some larger gamble. For example, he notes that most Humans reject 
the following gamble: 

50% chance to lose $100 and 50% chance to win $200 

He then shows that according to utility theory, an individual who rejects that 
gamble will also turn down the following gamble: 

50% chance to lose $200 and 50% chance to win $20,000 

But of course no one in his or her right mind will reject this gamble! In an 
exuberant article they wrote abo Blth"ins&gt; 

Perhaps carried away by their enthusiasm, they concluded their article 
by recalling the famous Monty Python sketch in which a frustrated customer 



attempts to return a dead parrot to a pet store. The customer uses a long 
series of phrases to describe the state of the bird, culminating in “this is an 
ex-parrot.” Rabin and Thaler went on to say that “it is time for economists 
to recognize that expected utility is an ex-hypothesis.” Many economists 
saw this flippant statement as little short of blasphemy. However, the 
theory-induced blindness of accepting the utility of wealth as an 
explanation of attitudes to small losses is a legitimate target for humorous 
comment. 


Blind Spots pf Prospect Theory 

So far in this part of the book I have extolled the virtues of prospect theory 
and criticized the rational model and expected utility theory. It is time for 
some balance. 

Most graduate students in economics have heard about prospect theory 
and loss aversion, but you are unlikely to find these terms in the index of an 
introductory text in economics. I am sometimes pained by this omission, 
but in fact it is quite reasonable, because of the central role of rationality in 
basic economic theory. The standard concepts and results that 
undergraduates are taught are most easily explained by assuming that 
Econs do not make foolish mistakes. This assumption is truly necessary, 
and it would be undermined by introducing the Humans of prospect theory, 
whose evaluations of outcomes are unreasonably short-sighted. 

There are good reasons for keeping prospect theory out of introductory 
texts. The basic concepts of economics are essential intellectual tools, 
which are not easy to grasp even with simplified and unrealistic 
assumptions about the nature of the economic agents who interact in 
markets. Raising questions about these assumptions even as they are 
introduced would be confusing, and perhaps demoralizing. It is reasonable 
to put priority on helping students acquire the basic tools of the discipline. 
Furthermore, the failure of rationality that is built into prospect theory is 
often irrelevant to the predictions of economic theory, which work out with 
great precision in some situations and provide good approximations in 
many others. In some contexts, however, the difference becomes 
significant: the Humans described by prospect theory are guided by the 
immediate emotional impact of gains and losses, not by long-term 
prospects of wealth and global utility. 

I emphasized theory-induced blindness in my discussion of flaws in 
Bernoulli’s model that remained unquestioned for more than two centuries. 
But of course theory-induced blindness is not restricted to expected utility 
theory. Prospect theory has flaws of its own, and theory-induced blindness 



to these flaws has contributed to its acceptance as the main alternative to 
utility theory. 

Consider the assumption of prospect theory, that the reference point, 
usually the status quo, has a value of zero. This assumption seems 
reasonable, but it leads to some absurd consequences. Have a good look 
at the following prospects. What would it be like to own them? 

A. one chance in a million to win $1 million 

B. 90% chance to win $12 and 10% chance to win nothing 

C. 90% chance to win $1 million and 10% chance to win nothing 

Winning nothing is a possible outcome in all three gambles, and prospect 
theory assigns the same value to that outcome in the three cases. Winning 
nothing is the reference point and its value is zero. Do these statements 
correspond to your experience? Of course not. Winning nothing is a 
nonevent in the first two cases, and assigning it a value of zero makes 
good sense. In contrast, failing to win in the third scenario is intensely 
disappointing. Like a salary increase that has been promised informally, 
the high probability of winning the large sum sets up a tentative new 
reference point. Relative to your expectations, winning nothing will be 
experienced as a large loss. Prospect theory cannot cope with this fact, 
because it does not allow the value of an outcome (in this case, winning 
nothing) to change when it is highly unlikely, or when the alternative is very 
valuable. In simple words, prospect theory cannot deal with 
disappointment. Disappointment and the anticipation of disappointment 
are real, however, and the failure to acknowledge them is as obvious a 
flow as the counterexamples that I invoked to criticize Bernoulli’s theory. 

Prospect theory and utility theory also fail to allow for regret. The two 
theories share the assumption that available options in a choice are 
evaluated separately and independently, and that the option with the 
highest value is selected. This assumption is certainly wrong, as the 
following example shows. 

Problem 6: Choose between 90% chance to win $1 million OR 
$50 with certainty. 


Problem 7: Choose between 90% chance to win $1 million OR 
$150,000 with certainty. 

Compare the anticipated pain of choosing the gamble and not winning in 
the two cases. Failing to win is a disappointment in both, but the potential 



pain is compounded in problem 7 by knowing that if you choose the 
gamble and lose you will regret the “greedy” decision you made by 
spurning a sure gift of $150,000. In regret, the experience of an outcome 
depends on an option you could have adopted but did not. 

Several economists and psychologists have proposed models of 
decision making that are based on the emotions of regret and 
disappointment. It is fair to say that these models have had less influence 
than prospect theory, and the reason is instructive. The emotions of regret 
and disappointment are real, and decision makers surely anticipate these 
emotions when making their choices. The problem is that regret theories 
make few striking predictions that would distinguish them from prospect 
theory, which has the advantage of being simpler. The complexity of 
prospect theory was more acceptable in the competition with expected 
utility theory because it did predict observations that expected utility theory 
could not explain. 

Richer and more realistic assumptions do not suffice to make a theory 
successful. Scientists use theories as a bag of working tools, and they will 
not take on the burden of a heavier bag unless the new tools are very 
useful. Prospect theory was accepted by many scholars not because it is 
“true” but because the concepts that it added to utility theory, notably the 
reference point and loss aversion, were worth the trouble; they yielded new 
predictions that turned out to be true. We were lucky. 

Speaking of Prospect Theory 

“He suffers from extreme loss aversion, which makes him turn down very 
favorable opportunities.” 


“Considering her vast wealth, her emotional response to trivial gains and 
losses makes no sense.” 


“He weighs losses about twice as much as gains, which is normal.” 



The Endowment Effect 


You have probably seen figure 11 or a close cousin of it even if you never 
had a class in economics. The graph displays an individual's “indifference 
map” for two goods. 



Figure 11 


Students learn in introductory economics classes that each point on the 
map specifies a particular combination of income and vacation days. Each 
“indifference curve” connects the combinations of the two goods that are 
equally desirable—they have the same utility. The curves would turn into 
parallel straight lines if people were willing to “sell” vacation days for extra 
income at the same price regardless of how much income and how much 
vacation time they have. The convex shape indicates diminishing marginal 
utility: the more leisure you have, the less you care for an extra day of it, 
and each added day is worth less than the one before. Similarly, the more 
income you have, the less you care for an extra dollar, and the amount you 
are willing to give up for an extra day of leisure increases. 

All locations on an indifference curve are equally attractive. This is 
literally what indifference means: you don’t care where you are on an 



indifference curve. So if A and B are on the same indifference curve for 
you, you are indifferent between them and will need no incentive to move 
from one to the other, or back. Some version of this figure has appeared in 
every economics textbook written in the last hundred years, and many 
millions of students have stared at it. Few have noticed what is missing. 
Here again, the power and elegance of a theoretical model have blinded 
students and scholars to a serious deficiency. 

What is missing from the figure is an indication of the individual’s current 
income and leisure. If you are a salaried employee, the terms of your 
employment specify a salary and a number of vacation days, which is a 
point on the map. This is your reference point, your status quo, but the 
figure does not show it. By failing to display it, the theorists who draw this 
figure invite you to believe that the reference point does not matter, but by 
now you know that of course it does. This is Bernoulli’s error all over again. 
The representation of indifference curves implicitly assumes that your utility 
at any given moment is determined entirely by your present situation, that 
the past is irrelevant, and that your evaluation of a possible job does not 
depend on the terms of your current job. These assumptions are 
completely unrealistic in this case and in many others. 

The omission of the ref Con serence point from the indifference map is a 
surprising case of theory-induced blindness, because we so often 
encounter cases in which the reference point obviously matters. In labor 
negotiations, it is well understood by both sides that the reference point is 
the existing contract and that the negotiations will focus on mutual 
demands for concessions relative to that reference point. The role of loss 
aversion in bargaining is also well understood: making concessions hurts. 
You have much personal experience of the role of reference point. If you 
changed jobs or locations, or even considered such a change, you surely 
remember that the features of the new place were coded as pluses or 
minuses relative to where you were. You may also have noticed that 
disadvantages loomed larger than advantages in this evaluation—loss 
aversion was at work. It is difficult to accept changes for the worse. For 
example, the minimal wage that unemployed workers would accept for new 
employment averages 90% of their previous wage, and it drops by less 
than 10% over a period of one year. 

To appreciate the power that the reference point exerts on choices, 
consider Albert and Ben, “hedonic twins” who have identical tastes and 
currently hold identical starting jobs, with little income and little leisure time. 
Their current circumstances correspond to the point marked 1 in figure 11. 
The firm offers them two improved positions, A and B, and lets them 
decide who will get a raise of $10,000 (position A) and who will get an 
extra day of paid vacation each month (position B). As they are both 



indifferent, they toss a coin. Albert gets the raise, Ben gets the extra 
leisure. Some time passes as the twins get accustomed to their positions. 
Now the company suggests they may switch jobs if they wish. 

The standard theory represented in the figure assumes that preferences 
are stable over time. Positions A and B are equally attractive for both twins 
and they will need little or no incentive to switch. In sharp contrast, prospect 
theory asserts that both twins will definitely prefer to remain as they are. 
This preference for the status quo is a consequence of loss aversion. 

Let us focus on Albert. He was initially in position 1 on the graph, and 
from that reference point he found these two alternatives equally attractive: 

Go to A: a raise of $10,000 

OR 

Go to B: 12 extra days of vacation 

Taking position A changes Albert’s reference point, and when he 
considers switching to B, his choice has a new structure: 

Stay at A: no gain and no loss 

OR 

Move to B: 12 extra days of vacation and a $10,000 salary cut 

You just had the subjective experience of loss aversion. You could feel it: a 
salary cut of $10,000 is very bad news. Even if a gain of 12 vacation days 
was as impressive as a gain of $10,000, the same improvement of leisure 
is not sufficient to compensate for a loss of $10,000. Albert will stay at A 
because the disadvantage of moving outweighs the advantage. The same 
reasoning applies to Ben, who will also want to keep his present job 
because the loss of now-precious leisure outweighs the benefit of the extra 
income. 

This example highlights two aspects of choice that the st Bon s Ae st 
Bonandard model of indifference curves does not predict. First, tastes are 
not fixed; they vary with the reference point. Second, the disadvantages of 
a change loom larger than its advantages, inducing a bias that favors the 
status quo. Of course, loss aversion does not imply that you never prefer to 
change your situation; the benefits of an opportunity may exceed even 
overweighted losses. Loss aversion implies only that choices are strongly 
biased in favor of the reference situation (and generally biased to favor 
small rather than large changes). 

Conventional indifference maps and Bernoulli’s representation of 
outcomes as states of wealth share a mistaken assumption: that your utility 
for a state of affairs depends only on that state and is not affected by your 



history. Correcting that mistake has been one of the achievements of 
behavioral economics. 

The Endowment Effect 

The question of when an approach or a movement got its start is often 
difficult to answer, but the origin of what is now known as behavioral 
economics can be specified precisely. In the early 1970s, Richard Thaler, 
then a graduate student in the very conservative economics department of 
the University of Rochester, began having heretical thoughts. Thaler always 
had a sharp wit and an ironic bent, and as a student he amused himself by 
collecting observations of behavior that the model of rational economic 
behavior could not explain. He took special pleasure in evidence of 
economic irrationality among his professors, and he found one that was 
particularly striking. 

Professor R (now revealed to be Richard Rosett, who went on to 
become the dean of the University of Chicago Graduate School of 
Business) was a firm believer in standard economic theory as well as a 
sophisticated wine lover. Thaler observed that Professor R was very 
reluctant to sell a bottle from his collection—even at the high price of $100 
(in 1975 dollars!). Professor R bought wine at auctions, but would never 
pay more than $35 for a bottle of that quality. At prices between $35 and 
$100, he would neither buy nor sell. The large gap is inconsistent with 
economic theory, in which the professor is expected to have a single value 
for the bottle. If a particular bottle is worth $50 to him, then he should be 
willing to sell it for any amount in excess of $50. If he did not own the bottle, 
he should be willing to pay any amount up to $50 for it. The just-acceptable 
selling price and the just-acceptable buying price should have been 
identical, but in fact the minimum price to sell ($100) was much higher than 
the maximum buying price of $35. Owning the good appeared to increase 
its value. 

Richard Thaler found many examples of what he called the endowment 
effect, especially for goods that are not regularly traded. Nbu can easily 
imagine yourself in a similar situation. Suppose you hold a ticket to a sold- 
out concert by a popular band, which you bought at the regular price of 
$200. Nbu are an avid fan and would have been willing to pay up to $500 
for the ticket. Now you have your ticket and you learn on the Internet that 
richer or more desperate fans are offering $3,000. Would you sell? If you 
resemble most of the audience at sold-out events you do not sell. \bur 
lowest selling price is above $3,000 and your maximum buying price is 
$500. This is an example of an endowment effect, and a believer in 



standard economic theory would be puzzled by it. Thaler was looking for an 
account that could explain puzzles of this kind. 

Chance intervened when Thaler met one of our former students at a 
conference and obtained an early draft of prospect theory. He reports that 
he read the manuscript with considerable Bon s Able Bonexcitement, 
because he quickly realized that the loss-averse value function of prospect 
theory could explain the endowment effect and some other puzzles in his 
collection. The solution was to abandon the standard idea that Professor R 
had a unique utility for the state of having a particular bottle. Prospect 
theory suggested that the willingness to buy or sell the bottle depends on 
the reference point—whether or not the professor owns the bottle now. If he 
owns it, he considers the pain of giving up the bottle. If he does not own it, 
he considers the pleasure of getting the bottle. The values were unequal 
because of loss aversion: giving up a bottle of nice wine is more painful 
than getting an equally good bottle is pleasurable. Remember the graph of 
losses and gains in the previous chapter. The slope of the function is 
steeper in the negative domain; the response to a loss is stronger than the 
response to a corresponding gain. This was the explanation of the 
endowment effect that Thaler had been searching for. And the first 
application of prospect theory to an economic puzzle now appears to have 
been a significant milestone in the development of behavioral economics. 

Thaler arranged to spend a year at Stanford when he knew that Amos 
and I would be there. During this productive period, we learned much from 
each other and became friends. Seven years later, he and I had another 
opportunity to spend a year together and to continue the conversation 
between psychology and economics. The Russell Sage Foundation, which 
was for a long time the main sponsor of behavioral economics, gave one 
of its first grants to Thaler for the purpose of spending a year with me in 
Vancouver. During that year, we worked closely with a local economist, 
Jack Knetsch, with whom we shared intense interest in the endowment 
effect, the rules of economic fairness, and spicy Chinese food. 

The starting point for our investigation was that the endowment effect is 
not universal. If someone asks you to change a $5 bill for five singles, you 
hand over the five ones without any sense of loss. Nor is there much loss 
aversion when you shop for shoes. The merchant who gives up the shoes 
in exchange for money certainly feels no loss. Indeed, the shoes that he 
hands over have always been, from his point of view, a cumbersome proxy 
for money that he was hoping to collect from some consumer. Furthermore, 
you probably do not experience paying the merchant as a loss, because 
you were effectively holding money as a proxy for the shoes you intended 
to buy. These cases of routine trading are not essentially different from the 



exchange of a $5 bill for five singles. There is no loss aversion on either 
side of routine commercial exchanges. 

What distinguishes these market transactions from Professor R’s 
reluctance to sell his wine, or the reluctance of Super Bowl ticket holders to 
sell even at a very high price? The distinctive feature is that both the shoes 
the merchant sells you and the money you spend from your budget for 
shoes are held “for exchange.” They are intended to be traded for other 
goods. Other goods, such as wine and Super Bowl tickets, are held “for 
use,” to be consumed or otherwise enjoyed. \bur leisure time and the 
standard of living that your income supports are also not intended for sale 
or exchange. 

Knetsch, Thaler, and I set out to design an experiment that would 
highlight the contrast between goods that are held for use and for 
exchange. We borrowed one aspect of the design of our experiment from 
Vernon Smith, the founder of experimental economics, with whom I would 
share a Nobel Prize many years later. In this method, a limited number of 
tokens are distributed to the participants in a “market.” Any participants 
who own a token at the end Bon s A end Bon of the experiment can 
redeem it for cash. The redemption values differ for different individuals, to 
represent the fact that the goods traded in markets are more valuable to 
some people than to others. The same token may be worth $10 to you and 
$20 to me, and an exchange at any price between these values will be 
advantageous to both of us. 

Smith created vivid demonstrations of how well the basic mechanisms 
of supply and demand work. Individuals would make successive public 
offers to buy or sell a token, and others would respond publicly to the offer. 
Everyone watches these exchanges and sees the price at which the 
tokens change hands. The results are as regular as those of a 
demonstration in physics. As inevitably as water flows downhill, those who 
own a token that is of little value to them (because their redemption values 
are low) end up selling their token at a profit to someone who values it 
more. When trading ends, the tokens are in the hands of those who can get 
the most money for them from the experimenter. The magic of the markets 
has worked! Furthermore, economic theory correctly predicts both the final 
price at which the market will settle and the number of tokens that will 
change hands. If half the participants in the market were randomly 
assigned tokens, the theory predicts that half of the tokens will change 
hands. 

We used a variation on Smith’s method for our experiment. Each 
session began with several rounds of trades for tokens, which perfectly 
replicated Smith’s finding. The estimated number of trades was typically 
very close or identical to the amount predicted by the standard theory. The 



tokens, of course, had value only because they could be exchanged for the 
experimenter’s cash; they had no value for use. Then we conducted a 
similar market for an object that we expected people to value for use: an 
attractive coffee mug, decorated with the university insignia of wherever we 
were conducting the experiments. The mug was then worth about $6 (and 
would be worth about double that amount today). Mugs were distributed 
randomly to half the participants. The Sellers had their mug in front of them, 
and the Buyers were invited to look at their neighbor’s mug; all indicated 
the price at which they would trade. The Buyers had to use their own 
money to acquire a mug. The results were dramatic: the average selling 
price was about double the average buying price, and the estimated 
number of trades was less than half of the number predicted by standard 
theory. The magic of the market did not work for a good that the owners 
expected to use. 

We conducted a series of experiments using variants of the same 
procedure, always with the same results. My favorite is one in which we 
added to the Sellers and Buyers a third group—Choosers. Unlike the 
Buyers, who had to spend their own money to acquire the good, the 
Choosers could receive either a mug or a sum of money, and they 
indicated the amount of money that was as desirable as receiving the 
good. These were the results: 

Sellers $7.12 
Choosers $3.12 
Buyers $2.87 

The gap between Sellers and Choosers is remarkable, because they 
actually face the same choice! If you are a Seller you can go home with 
either a m Bon s A a m Bonug or money, and if you are a Chooser you 
have exactly the same two options. The long-term effects of the decision 
are identical for the two groups. The only difference is in the emotion of the 
moment. The high price that Sellers set reflects the reluctance to give up 
an object that they already own, a reluctance that can be seen in babies 
who hold on fiercely to a toy and show great agitation when it is taken 
away. Loss aversion is built into the automatic evaluations of System 1. 

Buyers and Choosers set similar cash values, although the Buyers have 
to pay for the mug, which is free for the Choosers. This is what we would 

expect if Buyers do not experience spending money on the mug as a loss. 
Evidence from brain imaging confirms the difference. Selling goods that 
one would normally use activates regions of the brain that are associated 
with disgust and pain. Buying also activates these areas, but only when the 



prices are perceived as too high—when you feel that a seller is taking 
money that exceeds the exchange value. Brain recordings also indicate 
that buying at especially low prices is a pleasurable event. 

The cash value that the Sellers set on the mug is a bit more than twice 
as high as the value set by Choosers and Buyers. The ratio is very close to 
the loss aversion coefficient in risky choice, as we might expect if the 
same value function for gains and losses of money is applied to both 
riskless and risky decisions. A ratio of about 2:1 has appeared in studies 
of diverse economic domains, including the response of households to 
price changes. As economists would predict, customers tend to increase 
their purchases of eggs, orange juice, or fish when prices drop and to 
reduce their purchases when prices rise; however, in contrast to the 
predictions of economic theory, the effect of price increases (losses 
relative to the reference price) is about twice as large as the effect of 
gains. 

The mugs experiment has remained the standard demonstration of the 
endowment effect, along with an even simpler experiment that Jack 
Knetsch reported at about the same time. Knetsch asked two classes to fill 
out a questionnaire and rewarded them with a gift that remained in front of 
them for the duration of the experiment. In one session, the prize was an 
expensive pen; in another, a bar of Swiss chocolate. At the end of the 
class, the experimenter showed the alternative gift and allowed everyone 
to trade his or her gift for another. Only about 10% of the participants opted 
to exchange their gift. Most of those who had received the pen stayed with 
the pen, and those who had received the chocolate did not budge either. 

Thinking Like a Trader 

The fundamental ideas of prospect theory are that reference points exist, 
and that losses loom larger than corresponding gains. Observations in real 
markets collected over the years illustrate the power of these concepts. A 
study of the market for condo apartments in Boston during a downturn 
yielded particularly clear results. The authors of that study compared the 
behavior of owners of similar units who had bought their dwellings at 
different prices. Fora rational agent, the buying price is irrelevant history— 
the current market value is all that matters. Not so for Humans in a down 
market for housing. Owners who have a high reference point and thus face 
higher losses set a higher price on their dwelling, spend a longer time 
trying to sell their home, and eventually receive more money. 

The original demonstration of an asymmetry between selling prices and 
buying prices (or, more convincingly, between selling and choosing) was 



very important in the initial acceptance of the ideas of reference point and 
loss aversi Bon s Aersi Bonon. However, it is well understood that 
reference points are labile, especially in unusual laboratory situations, and 
that the endowment effect can be eliminated by changing the reference 
point. 

No endowment effect is expected when owners view their goods as 
carriers of value for future exchanges, a widespread attitude in routine 
commerce and in financial markets. The experimental economist John 
List, who has studied trading at baseball card conventions, found that 
novice traders were reluctant to part with the cards they owned, but that this 
reluctance eventually disappeared with trading experience. More 
surprisingly, List found a large effect of trading experience on the 
endowment effect for new goods. 

At a convention, List displayed a notice that invited people to take part in 
a short survey, for which they would be compensated with a small gift: a 
coffee mug or a chocolate bar of equal value. The gift s were assigned at 
random. As the volunteers were about to leave, List said to each of them, 
“We gave you a mug [or chocolate bar], but you can trade for a chocolate 
bar [or mug] instead, if you wish.” In an exact replication of Jack Knetsch’s 
earlier experiment, List found that only 18% of the inexperienced traders 
were willing to exchange their gift for the other. In sharp contrast, 
experienced traders showed no trace of an endowment effect: 48% of 
them traded! At least in a market environment in which trading was the 
norm, they showed no reluctance to trade. 

Jack Knetsch also conducted experiments in which subtle manipulations 
made the endowment effect disappear. Participants displayed an 
endowment effect only if they had physical possession of the good for a 
while before the possibility of trading it was mentioned. Economists of the 
standard persuasion might be tempted to say that Knetsch had spent too 
much time with psychologists, because his experimental manipulation 
showed concern for the variables that social psychologists expect to be 
important. Indeed, the different methodological concerns of experimental 
economists and psychologists have been much in evidence in the ongoing 
debate about the endowment effect. 

Veteran traders have apparently learned to ask the correct question, 
which is “How much do I want to have that mug, compared with other 
things I could have instead?” This is the question that Econs ask, and with 
this question there is no endowment effect, because the asymmetry 
between the pleasure of getting and the pain of giving up is irrelevant. 

Recent studies of the psychology of “decision making under poverty” 
suggest that the poor are another group in which we do not expect to find 
the endowment effect. Being poor, in prospect theory, is living below one’s 



reference point. There are goods that the poor need and cannot afford, so 
they are always “in the losses.” Small amounts of money that they receive 
are therefore perceived as a reduced loss, not as a gain. The money helps 
one climb a little toward the reference point, but the poor always remain on 
the steep limb of the value function. 

People who are poor think like traders, but the dynamics are quite 
different. Unlike traders, the poor are not indifferent to the differences 
between gaining and giving up. Their problem is that all their choices are 
between losses. Money that is spent on one good is the loss of another 
good that could have been purchased instead. For the poor, costs are 
losses. 

We all know people for whom spending is painful, although they are 
objectively quite well-off. There may also be cultural differences in the 
attitude toward money, and especially toward the spending of money on 
whims Bon s Ahims Bon and minor luxuries, such as the purchase of a 
decorated mug. Such a difference may explain the large discrepancy 
between the results of the “mugs study” in the United States and in the UK. 
Buying and selling prices diverge substantially in experiments conducted in 
samples of students of the United States, but the differences are much 
smaller among English students. Much remains to be learned about the 
endowment effect. 

Speaking Of The Endowment Effect 


“She didn’t care which of the two offices she would get, but a day 
after the announcement was made, she was no longer willing to 
trade. Endowment effect!” 


“These negotiations are going nowhere because both sides find 
it difficult to make concessions, even when they can get 
something in return. Losses loom larger than gains.” 


“When they raised their prices, demand dried up.” 


“He just hates the idea of selling his house for less money than he 
paid for it. Loss aversion is at work.” 


“He is a miser, and treats any dollar he spends as a loss.” 



Bad Events 


The concept of loss aversion is certainly the most significant contribution of 
psychology to behavioral economics. This is odd, because the idea that 
people evaluate many outcomes as gains and losses, and that losses 
loom larger than gains, surprises no one. Amos and I often joked that we 
were engaged in studying a subject about which our grandmothers knew a 
great deal. In fact, however, we know more than our grandmothers did and 
can now embed loss aversion in the context of a broader two-systems 
model of the mind, and specifically a biological and psychological view in 
which negativity and escape dominate positivity and approach. We can 
also trace the consequences of loss aversion in surprisingly diverse 
observations: only out-of-pocket losses are compensated when goods are 
lost in transport; attempts at large-scale reforms very often fail; and 
professional golfers putt more accurately for par than for a birdie. Clever 
as she was, my grandmother would have been surprised by the specific 
predictions from a general idea she considered obvious. 

Negativity Dominance 



Figure 12 

Your heartbeat accelerated when you looked at the left-hand figure. It 
accelerated even before you could label what is so eerie about that 
picture. After some time you may have recognized the eyes of a terrified 
person. The eyes on the right, narrowed by the Crro raised cheeks of a 
smile, express happiness—and they are not nearly as exciting. The two 
pictures were presented to people lying in a brain scanner. Each picture 
was shown for less than 2 /100 of a second and immediately masked by 
“visual noise,” a random display of dark and bright squares. None of the 
observers ever consciously knew that he had seen pictures of eyes, but 
one part of their brain evidently knew: the amygdala, which has a primary 
role as the “threat center” of the brain, although it is also activated in other 
emotional states. Images of the brain showed an intense response of the 
amygdala to a threatening picture that the viewer did not recognize. The 



information about the threat probably traveled via a superfast neural 
channel that feeds directly into a part of the brain that processes emotions, 
bypassing the visual cortex that supports the conscious experience of 
“seeing.” The same circuit also causes schematic angry faces (a potential 
threat) to be processed faster and more efficiently than schematic happy 
faces. Some experimenters have reported that an angry face “pops out” of 
a crowd of happy faces, but a single happy face does not stand out in an 
angry crowd. The brains of humans and other animals contain a 
mechanism that is designed to give priority to bad news. By shaving a few 
hundredths of a second from the time needed to detect a predator, this 
circuit improves the animal’s odds of living long enough to reproduce. The 
automatic operations of System 1 reflect this evolutionary history. No 
comparably rapid mechanism for recognizing good news has been 
detected. Of course, we and our animal cousins are quickly alerted to 
signs of opportunities to mate or to feed, and advertisers design billboards 
accordingly. Still, threats are privileged above opportunities, as they should 
be. 

The brain responds quickly even to purely symbolic threats. Emotionally 
loaded words quickly attract attention, and bad words (war, crime) attract 
attention faster than do happy words {peace , love). There is no real threat, 
but the mere reminder of a bad event is treated in System 1 as 
threatening. As we saw earlier with the word vomit, the symbolic 
representation associatively evokes in attenuated form many of the 
reactions to the real thing, including physiological indices of emotion and 
even fractional tendencies to avoid or approach, recoil or lean forward. 
The sensitivity to threats extends to the processing of statements of 
opinions with which we strongly disagree. For example, depending on your 
attitude to euthanasia, it would take your brain less than one-quarter of a 
second to register the “threat” in a sentence that starts with “I think 
euthanasia is an acceptable/unacceptable...” 

The psychologist Paul Rozin, an expert on disgust, observed that a 
single cockroach will completely wreck the appeal of a bowl of cherries, 
but a cherry will do nothing at all for a bowl of cockroaches. As he points 
out, the negative trumps the positive in many ways, and loss aversion is 
one of many manifestations of a broad negativity dominance. Other 
scholars, in a paper titled “Bad Is Stronger Than Good,” summarized the 
evidence as follows: “Bad emotions, bad parents, and bad feedback have 
more impact than good ones, and bad information is processed more 
thoroughly than good. The self is more motivated to avoid bad self¬ 
definitions than to pursue good ones. Bad impressions and bad 
stereotypes are quicker to form and more resistant to disconfirmation than 



good ones.” They cite John Gottman, the well-known expert in marital 
relations, who observed that the long-term success of a relationship 
depends far more on avoiding the negative than on seeking the positive. 
Gottman estimated that a stable relationship requires Brro Qres Brrthat 
good interactions outnumber bad interactions by at least 5 to 1. Other 
asymmetries in the social domain are even more striking. We all know that 
a friendship that may take years to develop can be ruined by a single 
action. 

Some distinctions between good and bad are hardwired into our 
biology. Infants enter the world ready to respond to pain as bad and to 
sweet (up to a point) as good. In many situations, however, the boundary 
between good and bad is a reference point that changes over time and 
depends on the immediate circumstances. Imagine that you are out in the 
country on a cold night, inadequately dressed for the torrential rain, your 
clothes soaked. A stinging cold wind completes your misery. As you 
wander around, you find a large rock that provides some shelter from the 
fury of the elements. The biologist Michel Cabanac would call the 
experience of that moment intensely pleasurable because it functions, as 
pleasure normally does, to indicate the direction of a biologically 
significant improvement of circumstances. The pleasant relief will not last 
very long, of course, and you will soon be shivering behind the rock again, 
driven by your renewed suffering to seek better shelter. 

Goals are Reference Points 

Loss aversion refers to the relative strength of two motives: we are driven 
more strongly to avoid losses than to achieve gains. A reference point is 
sometimes the status quo, but it can also be a goal in the future: not 
achieving a goal is a loss, exceeding the goal is a gain. As we might 
expect from negativity dominance, the two motives are not equally 
powerful. The aversion to the failure of not reaching the goal is much 
stronger than the desire to exceed it. 

People often adopt short-term goals that they strive to achieve but not 
necessarily to exceed. They are likely to reduce their efforts when they 
have reached an immediate goal, with results that sometimes violate 
economic logic. New \brk cabdrivers, for example, may have a target 
income for the month or the year, but the goal that controls their effort is 
typically a daily target of earnings. Of course, the daily goal is much easier 
to achieve (and exceed) on some days than on others. On rainy days, a 
New York cab never remains free for long, and the driver quickly achieves 
his target; not so in pleasant weather, when cabs often waste time cruising 



the streets looking for fares. Economic logic implies that cabdrivers should 
work many hours on rainy days and treat themselves to some leisure on 
mild days, when they can “buy” leisure at a lower price. The logic of loss 
aversion suggests the opposite: drivers who have a fixed daily target will 
work many more hours when the pickings are slim and go home early 
when rain-drenched customers are begging to be taken somewhere. 

The economists Devin Pope and Maurice Schweitzer, at the University 
of Pennsylvania, reasoned that golf provides a perfect example of a 
reference point: par. Every hole on the golf course has a number of strokes 
associated with it; the par number provides the baseline for good—but not 
outstanding—performance. For a professional golfer, a birdie (one stroke 
under par) is a gain, and a bogey (one stroke over par) is a loss. The 
economists compared two situations a player might face when near the 
hole: 


• putt to avoid a bogey 

• putt to achieve a birdie 


Every stroke counts in golf, and in professional golf every stroke counts a 
lot. According to prospect theory, however, some strokes count more than 
others. Failing to make par is a los Brro Q los Brrs, but missing a birdie 
putt is a foregone gain, not a loss. Pope and Schweitzer reasoned from 
loss aversion that players would try a little harder when putting for par (to 
avoid a bogey) than when putting for a birdie. They analyzed more than 2.5 
million putts in exquisite detail to test that prediction. 

They were right. Whether the putt was easy or hard, at every distance 
from the hole, the players were more successful when putting for par than 
for a birdie. The difference in their rate of success when going for par (to 
avoid a bogey) or for a birdie was 3.6%. This difference is not trivial. Tiger 
Woods was one of the “participants” in their study. If in his best years Tiger 
Woods had managed to putt as well for birdies as he did for par, his 
average tournament score would have improved by one stroke and his 
earnings by almost $1 million per season. These fierce competitors 
certainly do not make a conscious decision to slack off on birdie putts, but 
their intense aversion to a bogey apparently contributes to extra 
concentration on the task at hand. 

The study of putts illustrates the power of a theoretical concept as an aid 
to thinking. Who would have thought it worthwhile to spend months 
analyzing putts for par and birdie? The idea of loss aversion, which 



surprises no one except perhaps some economists, generated a precise 
and nonintuitive hypothesis and led researchers to a finding that surprised 
everyone—including professional golfers. 

Defending the Status Quo 

If you are set to look for it, the asymmetric intensity of the motives to avoid 
losses and to achieve gains shows up almost everywhere. It is an ever¬ 
present feature of negotiations, especially of renegotiations of an existing 
contract, the typical situation in labor negotiations and in international 
discussions of trade or arms limitations. The existing terms define 
reference points, and a proposed change in any aspect of the agreement 
is inevitably viewed as a concession that one side makes to the other. 
Loss aversion creates an asymmetry that makes agreements difficult to 
reach. The concessions you make to me are my gains, but they are your 
losses; they cause you much more pain than they give me pleasure. 
Inevitably, you will place a higher value on them than I do. The same is true, 
of course, of the very painful concessions you demand from me, which you 
do not appear to value sufficiently! Negotiations over a shrinking pie are 
especially difficult, because they require an allocation of losses. People 
tend to be much more easygoing when they bargain over an expanding 
pie. 

Many of the messages that negotiators exchange in the course of 
bargaining are attempts to communicate a reference point and provide an 
anchor to the other side. The messages are not always sincere. 
Negotiators often pretend intense attachment to some good (perhaps 
missiles of a particular type in bargaining overarms reductions), although 
they actually view that good as a bargaining chip and intend ultimately to 
give it away in an exchange. Because negotiators are influenced by a 
norm of reciprocity, a concession that is presented as painful calls for an 
equally painful (and perhaps equally inauthentic) concession from the other 
side. 

Animals, including people, fight harder to prevent losses than to achieve 
gains. In the world of territorial animals, this principle explains the success 
of defenders. A biologist observed that “when a territory holder is 
challenged by a rival, the owner almost always wins the contest—usually 
within a matter of seconds.” In human affairs, the same simple rule explains 
much of what happens when institutions attempt to reform themselves, in 
“reo Brro Q;reo Brrrganizations” and “restructuring” of companies, and in 
efforts to rationalize a bureaucracy, simplify the tax code, or reduce 
medical costs. As initially conceived, plans for reform almost always 



produce many winners and some losers while achieving an overall 
improvement. If the affected parties have any political influence, however, 
potential losers will be more active and determined than potential winners; 
the outcome will be biased in their favor and inevitably more expensive 
and less effective than initially planned. Reforms commonly include 
grandfather clauses that protect current stake-holders—for example, when 
the existing workforce is reduced by attrition rather than by dismissals, or 
when cuts in salaries and benefits apply only to future workers. Loss 
aversion is a powerful conservative force that favors minimal changes from 
the status quo in the lives of both institutions and individuals. This 
conservatism helps keep us stable in our neighborhood, our marriage, and 
our job; it is the gravitational force that holds our life together near the 
reference point. 


Loss Aversion in the Law 

During the year that we spent working together in Vancouver, Richard 
Thaler, Jack Knetsch, and I were drawn into a study of fairness in 
economic transactions, partly because we were interested in the topic but 
also because we had an opportunity as well as an obligation to make up a 
new questionnaire every week. The Canadian government’s Department 
of Fisheries and Oceans had a program for unemployed professionals in 
Toronto, who were paid to administer telephone surveys. The large team of 
interviewers worked every night and new questions were constantly 
needed to keep the operation going. Through Jack Knetsch, we agreed to 
generate a questionnaire every week, in four color-labeled versions. We 
could ask about anything; the only constraint was that the questionnaire 
should include at least one mention of fish, to make it pertinent to the 
mission of the department. This went on for many months, and we treated 
ourselves to an orgy of data collection. 

We studied public perceptions of what constitutes unfair behavior on the 
part of merchants, employers, and landlords. Our overarching question 
was whether the opprobrium attached to unfairness imposes constraints 
on profit seeking. We found that it does. We also found that the moral rules 
by which the public evaluates what firms may or may not do draw a crucial 
distinction between losses and gains. The basic principle is that the 
existing wage, price, or rent sets a reference point, which has the nature of 
an entitlement that must not be infringed. It is considered unfair for the firm 
to impose losses on its customers or workers relative to the reference 
transaction, unless it must do so to protect its own entitlement. Consider 
this example: 



A hardware store has been selling snow shovels for $15. The 
morning after a large snowstorm, the store raises the price to 
$ 20 . 

Please rate this action as: 

Completely Fair Acceptable Unfair Very Unfair 

The hardware store behaves appropriately according to the standard 
economic model: it responds to increased demand by raising its price. 
The participants in the survey did not agree: 82% rated the action Unfair or 
Very Unfair. They evidently viewed the pre-blizzard price as a reference 
point and the raised price as a loss that the store imposes on its 
customers, not because it must but simply because it can. A basic rule of 
fairness, we found, i Brro Qd, i Brrs that the exploitation of market power to 
impose losses on others is unacceptable. The following example illustrates 
this rule in another context (the dollar values should be adjusted for about 
100% inflation since these data were collected in 1984): 

A small photocopying shop has one employee who has worked 
there for six months and earns $9 per hour. Business continues to 
be satisfactory, but a factory in the area has closed and 
unemployment has increased. Other small shops have now hired 
reliable workers at $7 an hour to perform jobs similar to those 
done by the photocopy shop employee. The owner of the shop 
reduces the employee’s wage to $7. 

The respondents did not approve: 83% considered the behavior Unfair or 
Very Unfair. However, a slight variation on the question clarifies the nature 
of the employer’s obligation. The background scenario of a profitable store 
in an area of high unemployment is the same, but now 

the current employee leaves, and the owner decides to pay a 
replacement $7 an hour. 

A large majority (73%) considered this action Acceptable. It appears that 
the employer does not have a moral obligation to pay $9 an hour. The 
entitlement is personal: the current worker has a right to retain his wage 
even if market conditions would allow the employer to impose a wage cut. 
The replacement worker has no entitlement to the previous worker’s 
reference wage, and the employer is therefore allowed to reduce pay 
without the risk of being branded unfair. 

The firm has its own entitlement, which is to retain its current profit. If it 
faces a threat of a loss, it is allowed to transfer the loss to others. A 



substantial majority of respondents believed that it is not unfair for a firm to 
reduce its workers’ wages when its profitability is falling. We described the 
rules as defining dual entitlements to the firm and to individuals with whom 
it interacts. When threatened, it is not unfair for the firm to be selfish. It is 
not even expected to take on part of the losses; it can pass them on. 

Different rules governed what the firm could do to improve its profits or 
to avoid reduced profits. When a firm faced lower production costs, the 
rules of fairness did not require it to share the bonanza with either its 
customers or its workers. Of course, our respondents liked a firm better 
and described it as more fair if it was generous when its profits increased, 
but they did not brand as unfair a firm that did not share. They showed 
indignation only when a firm exploited its power to break informal contracts 
with workers or customers, and to impose a loss on others in order to 
increase its profit. The important task for students of economic fairness is 
not to identify ideal behavior but to find the line that separates acceptable 
conduct from actions that invite opprobrium and punishment. 

We were not optimistic when we submitted our report of this research to 
{he American Economic Review. Our article challenged what was then 
accepted wisdom among many economists that economic behavior is 
ruled by self-interest and that concerns for fairness are generally irrelevant. 
We also relied on the evidence of survey responses, for which economists 
generally have little respect. However, the editor of the journal sent our 
article for evaluation to two economists who were not bound by those 
conventions (we later learned their identity; they were the most friendly the 
editor could have found). The editor made the correct call. The article is 
often cited, and its conclusions Brro Qions Brr have stood the test of time. 
More recent research has supported the observations of reference- 
dependent fairness and has also shown that fairness concerns are 
economically significant, a fact we had suspected but did not prove. 
Employers who violate rules of fairness are punished by reduced 
productivity, and merchants who follow unfair pricing policies can expect to 
lose sales. People who learned from a new catalog that the merchant was 
now charging less for a product that they had recently bought at a higher 
price reduced their future purchases from that supplier by 15%, an average 
loss of $90 per customer. The customers evidently perceived the lower 
price as the reference point and thought of themselves as having sustained 
a loss by paying more than appropriate. Moreover, the customers who 
reacted the most strongly were those who bought more items and at higher 
prices. The losses far exceeded the gains from the increased purchases 
produced by the lower prices in the new catalog. 

Unfairly imposing losses on people can be risky if the victims are in a 
position to retaliate. Furthermore, experiments have shown that strangers 



who observe unfair behavior often join in the punishment. 
Neuroeconomists (scientists who combine economics with brain research) 
have used MRI machines to examine the brains of people who are 
engaged in punishing one stranger for behaving unfairly to another 
stranger. Remarkably, altruistic punishment is accompanied by increased 
activity in the “pleasure centers” of the brain. It appears that maintaining the 
social order and the rules of fairness in this fashion is its own reward. 
Altruistic punishment could well be the glue that holds societies together. 
However, our brains are not designed to reward generosity as reliably as 
they punish meanness. Here again, we find a marked asymmetry between 
losses and gains. 

The influence of loss aversion and entitlements extends far beyond the 
realm of financial transactions. Jurists were quick to recognize their impact 
on the law and in the administration of justice. In one study, David Cohen 
and Jack Knetsch found many examples of a sharp distinction between 
actual losses and foregone gains in legal decisions. For example, a 
merchant whose goods were lost in transit may be compensated for costs 
he actually incurred, but is unlikely to be compensated for lost profits. The 
familiar rule that possession is nine-tenths of the law confirms the moral 
status of the reference point. In a more recent discussion, Eyal Zamir 
makes the provocative point that the distinction drawn in the law between 
restoring losses and compensating for foregone gains may be justified by 
their asymmetrical effects on individual well-being. If people who lose 
suffer more than people who merely fail to gain, they may also deserve 
more protection from the law. 

Speaking of Losses 


“This reform will not pass. Those who stand to lose will fight 
harder than those who stand to gain.” 


“Each of them thinks the other’s concessions are less painful. 
They are both wrong, of course. It’s just the asymmetry of losses.” 


“They would find it easier to renegotiate the agreement if they 
realized the pie was actually expanding. They’re not allocating 
losses; they are allocating gains.” 


“Rental prices around here have gone up r Brro Qup r Brrecently, 
but our tenants don’t think it’s fair that we should raise their rent, 
too. They feel entitled to their current terms.” 


“My clients don’t resent the price hike because they know my 
costs have gone up, too. They accept my right to stay profitable.” 



The Fourfold Pattern 


Whenever you form a global evaluation of a complex object—a car you 
may buy, your son-in-law, or an uncertain situation—you assign weights to 
its characteristics. This is simply a cumbersome way of saying that some 
characteristics influence your assessment more than others do. The 
weighting occurs whether or not you are aware of it; it is an operation of 
System 1. Your overall evaluation of a car may put more or less weight on 
gas economy, comfort, or appearance. Your judgment of your son-in-law 
may depend more or less on how rich or handsome or reliable he is. 
Similarly, your assessment of an uncertain prospect assigns weights to the 
possible outcomes. The weights are certainly correlated with the 
probabilities of these outcomes: a 50% chance to win a million is much 
more attractive than a 1% chance to win the same amount. The 
assignment of weights is sometimes conscious and deliberate. Most often, 
however, you are just an observer to a global evaluation that your System 1 
delivers. 


Changing Chances 

One reason for the popularity of the gambling metaphor in the study of 
decision making is that it provides a natural rule for the assignment of 
weights to the outcomes of a prospect: the more probable an outcome, the 
more weight it should have. The expected value of a gamble is the average 
of its outcomes, each weighted by its probability. For example, the 
expected value of “20% chance to win $1,000 and 75% chance to win 
$100” is $275. In the pre-Bernoulli days, gambles were assessed by their 
expected value. Bernoulli retained this method for assigning weights to the 
outcomes, which is known as the expectation principle, but applied it to the 
psychological value of the outcomes. The utility of a gamble, in his theory, 
is the average of the utilities of its outcomes, each weighted by its 
probability. 

The expectation principle does not correctly describe how you think 
about the probabilities related to risky prospects. In the four examples 
below, your chances of receiving $1 million improve by 5%. Is the news 
equally good in each case? 

A. From 0 to 5% 

B. From 5% to 10% 

C. From 60% to 65% 

D. From 95% to 100% 



The expectation principle asserts that your utility increases in each case by 
exactly 5% of the utility of receiving $1 million. Does this prediction 
describe your experiences? Of course not. 

Everyone agrees that 0 —&gt; 5% and 95%-* 100% are more impressive 
than either 5%—» 10% or 60% —♦ 65%. Increasing the chances from 0 to 
5% transforms the situation, creating a possibility that did not exist earlier, 
a hope of winning the prize. It is a qualitative change, where 5—&gt; 10% is 
only a quantitative improvement. The change from 5% to 10% doubles the 
probability of winning, but there is general agreement that the 
psychological value of the prospect does not double. The large impact of 0 
—» 5% illustrates the possibility effect, which causes highly unlikely 
outcomes to be weighted disproportionately more than they “deserve.” 
People who buy lottery tickets in vast amounts show themselves willing to 
pay much more than expected value for very small chances to win a large 
prize. 

The improvement from 95% to 100% is another qualitative change that 
has a large impact, the certainty effect. Outcomes that are almost certain 
are given less weight than their probability justifies. To appreciate the 
certainty effect, imagine that you inherited $1 million, but your greedy 
stepsister has contested the will in court. The decision is expected 
tomorrow. Your lawyer assures you that you have a strong case and that 
you have a 95% chance to win, but he takes pains to remind you that 
judicial decisions are never perfectly predictable. Now you are 
approached by a risk-adjustment company, which offers to buy your case 
for $910,000 outright—take it or leave it. The offer is lower (by $40,000!) 
than the expected value of waiting for the judgment (which is $950,000), 
but are you quite sure you would want to reject it? If such an event actually 
happens in your life, you should know that a large industry of “structured 
settlements” exists to provide certainty at a heft y price, by taking 
advantage of the certainty effect. 

Possibility and certainty have similarly powerful effects in the domain of 
losses. When a loved one is wheeled into surgery, a 5% risk that an 
amputation will be necessary is very bad—much more than half as bad as 
a 10% risk. Because of the possibility effect, we tend to overweight small 
risks and are willing to pay far more than expected value to eliminate them 
altogether. The psychological difference between a 95% risk of disaster 
and the certainty of disaster appears to be even greater; the sliver of hope 
that everything could still be okay looms very large. Overweighting of small 
probabilities increases the attractiveness of both gambles and insurance 
policies. 



The conclusion is straightforward: the decision weights that people 
assign to outcomes are not identical to the probabilities of these 
outcomes, contrary to the expectation principle. Improbable outcomes are 
overweighted—this is the possibility effect. Outcomes that are almost 
certain are underweighted relative to actual certainty. The expectation 
principle, by which values are weighted by their probability, is poor 
psychology. 

The plot thickens, however, because there is a powerful argument that a 
decision maker who wishes to be rational must conform to the expectation 
principle. This was the main point of the axiomatic version of utility theory 
that von Neumann and Morgenstem introduced in 1944. They proved that 
any weighting of uncertain outcomes that is not strictly proportional to 
probability leads to inconsistencies and other disasters. Their derivation of 
the expectation principle from axioms of rational choice was immediately 
recognized as a monumental achievement, which placed expected utility 
theory at the core of the rational agent model in economics and other 
social sciences. Thirty years later, when Amos introduced me to their work, 
he presented it as an object of awe. He also introduced me Bima a me 
Bimto a famous challenge to that theory. 

Allais’s Paradox 

In 1952, a few years after the publication of von Neumann and 
Morgenstern’s theory, a meeting was convened in Paris to discuss the 
economics of risk. Many of the most renowned economists of the time 
were in attendance. The American guests included the future Nobel 
laureates Paul Samuelson, Kenneth Arrow, and Milton Friedman, as well 
as the leading statistician Jimmie Savage. 

One of the organizers of the Paris meeting was Maurice Allais, who 
would also receive a Nobel Prize some years later. Allais had something 
up his sleeve, a couple of questions on choice that he presented to his 
distinguished audience. In the terms of this chapter, Allais intended to 
show that his guests were susceptible to a certainty effect and therefore 
violated expected utility theory and the axioms of rational choice on which 
that theory rests. The following set of choices is a simplified version of the 
puzzle that Allais constructed. In problems A and B, which would you 
choose? 

A. 61 % chance to win $520,000 OR 63% chance to win $500,000 


B. 98% chance to win $520,000 OR 100% chance to win $500,000 



If you are like most other people, you preferred the left-hand option in 
problem A and you preferred the right-hand option in problem B. If these 
were your preferences, you have just committed a logical sin and violated 
the rules of rational choice. The illustrious economists assembled in Paris 
committed similar sins in a more involved version of the “Allais paradox.” 

To see why these choices are problematic, imagine that the outcome 
will be determined by a blind draw from an urn that contains 100 marbles— 
you win if you draw a red marble, you lose if you draw white. In problem A, 
almost everybody prefers the left-hand urn, although it has fewer winning 
red marbles, because the difference in the size of the prize is more 
impressive than the difference in the chances of winning. In problem B, a 
large majority chooses the urn that guarantees a gain of $500,000. 
Furthermore, people are comfortable with both choices—until they are led 
through the logic of the problem. 

Compare the two problems, and you will see that the two urns of 
problem B are more favorable versions of the urns of problem A, with 37 
white marbles replaced by red winning marbles in each urn. The 
improvement on the left is clearly superior to the improvement on the right, 
since each red marble gives you a chance to win $520,000 on the left and 
only $500,000 on the right. So you started in the first problem with a 
preference for the left-hand urn, which was then improved more than the 
right-hand urn—but now you like the one on the right! This pattern of 
choices does not make logical sense, but a psychological explanation is 
readily available: the certainty effect is at work. The 2% difference between 
a 100% and a 98% chance to win in problem B is vastly more impressive 
than the same difference between 63% and 61 % in problem A. 

As Allais had anticipated, the sophisticated participants at the meeting 
did not notice that their preferences violated utility theory until he drew their 
attention to that fact as the meeting was about to end. Allais had intended 
this announcement to be a bombshell: the leading decision theorists in the 
world had preferences that were inconsistent with their own view of 
rationality! He apparently believed that his audience would be persuaded 
to give up the approach that Bima ahat Bimhe rather contemptuously 
labeled “the American school” and adopt an alternative logic of choice that 
he had developed. He was to be sorely disappointed. 

Economists who were not aficionados of decision theory mostly ignored 
the Allais problem. As often happens when a theory that has been widely 
adopted and found useful is challenged, they noted the problem as an 
anomaly and continued using expected utility theory as if nothing had 
happened. In contrast, decision theorists—a mixed collection of 



statisticians, economists, philosophers, and psychologists—took Allais’s 
challenge very seriously. When Amos and I began our work, one of our 
initial goals was to develop a satisfactory psychological account of Allais’s 
paradox. 

Most decision theorists, notably including Allais, maintained their belief 
in human rationality and tried to bend the rules of rational choice to make 
the Allais pattern permissible. Over the years there have been multiple 
attempts to find a plausible justification for the certainty effect, none very 
convincing. Amos had little patience for these efforts; he called the 
theorists who tried to rationalize violations of utility theory “lawyers for the 
misguided.” We went in another direction. We retained utility theory as a 
logic of rational choice but abandoned the idea that people are perfectly 
rational choosers. We took on the task of developing a psychological 
theory that would describe the choices people make, regardless of 
whether they are rational. In prospect theory, decision weights would not be 
identical to probabilities. 


Decision Weights 

Many years after we published prospect theory, Amos and I carried out a 
study in which we measured the decision weights that explained people’s 
preferences for gambles with modest monetary stakes. The estimates for 
gains are shown in table 4. 


Probability (%) 

0 

1 

2 

5 

10 

20 

50 

80 

90 

95 

98 

99 

100 

Decision weight 

0 

5.5 

8.1 

13.2 

18.6 

26.1 

42.1 

60.1 

71.2 

79.3 

87.1 

91.2 

100 


Table 4 

You can see that the decision weights are identical to the corresponding 
probabilities at the extremes: both equal to 0 when the outcome is 
impossible, and both equal to 100 when the outcome is a sure thing. 
However, decision weights depart sharply from probabilities near these 
points. At the low end, we find the possibility effect: unlikely events are 
considerably overweighted. For example, the decision weight that 
corresponds to a 2% chance is 8.1. If people conformed to the axioms of 
rational choice, the decision weight would be 2—so the rare event is 
overweighted by a factor of 4. The certainty effect at the other end of the 
probability scale is even more striking. A 2% risk of not winning the prize 
reduces the utility of the gamble by 13%, from 100 to 87.1. 

To appreciate the asymmetry between the possibility effect and the 

















certainty effect, imagine first that you have a 1% chance to win $1 million. 
You will know the outcome tomorrow. Now, imagine that you are almost 
certain to win $1 million, but there is a 1% chance that you will not. Again, 
you will learn the outcome tomorrow. The anxiety of the second situation 
appears to be more salient than the hope in the first. The certainty effect is 
also more striking than the possibility effect if the outcome is a surgical 
disaster rather than a financial gain. Compare the intensity with which you 
focus on the faint sliver of hope in an operation that is almost certain to be 
fatal, compared to the fear of a 1 % risk. 

&lt; Bima av&gt; &lt; Bimp height="0%" width="5%"&gt;The combination of the 
certainty effect and possibility effects at the two ends of the probability 
scale is inevitably accompanied by inadequate sensitivity to intermediate 
probabilities. You can see that the range of probabilities between 5% and 
95% is associated with a much smaller range of decision weights (from 
13.2 to 79.3), about two-thirds as much as rationally expected. 
Neuroscientists have confirmed these observations, finding regions of the 
brain that respond to changes in the probability of winning a prize. The 
brain’s response to variations of probabilities is strikingly similar to the 
decision weights estimated from choices. 

Probabilities that are extremely low or high (below 1% or above 99%) 
are a special case. It is difficult to assign a unique decision weight to very 
rare events, because they are sometimes ignored altogether, effectively 
assigned a decision weight of zero. On the other hand, when you do not 
ignore the very rare events, you will certainly overweight them. Most of us 
spend very little time worrying about nuclear meltdowns or fantasizing 
about large inheritances from unknown relatives. However, when an 
unlikely event becomes the focus of attention, we will assign it much more 
weight than its probability deserves. Furthermore, people are almost 
completely insensitive to variations of risk among small probabilities. A 
cancer risk of 0.001 % is not easily distinguished from a risk of 0.00001 %, 
although the former would translate to 3,000 cancers for the population of 
the United States, and the latter to 30. 


When you pay attention to a threat, you worry—and the decision weights 
reflect how much you worry. Because of the possibility effect, the worry is 
not proportional to the probability of the threat. Reducing or mitigating the 
risk is not adequate; to eliminate the worry the probability must be brought 
down to zero. 

The question below is adapted from a study of the rationality of 
consumer valuations of health risks, which was published by a team of 
economists in the 1980s. The survey was addressed to parents of small 



children. 


Suppose that you currently use an insect spray that costs you $10 
per bottle and it results in 15 inhalation poisonings and 15 child 
poisonings for every 10,000 bottles of insect spray that are used. 


You learn of a more expensive insecticide that reduces each of 
the risks to 5 for every 10,000 bottles. How much would you be 
willing to pay for it? 

The parents were willing to pay an additional $2.38, on average, to reduce 
the risks by two-thirds from 15 per 10,000 bottles to 5. They were willing to 
pay $8.09, more than three times as much, to eliminate it completely. Other 
questions showed that the parents treated the two risks (inhalation and 
child poisoning) as separate worries and were willing to pay a certainty 
premium for the complete elimination of either one. This premium is 
compatible with the psychology of worry but not with the rational model. 

The Fourfold Pattern 

When Amos and I began our work on prospect theory, we quickly reached 
two conclusions: people attach values to gains and losses rather than to 
wealth, and the decision weights that they assign to outcomes are different 
from probabilities. Neither idea was completely new, but in combination 
they explained a distinctive pattern of preferences that we ca Bima ae ca 
Bimlled the fourfold pattern. The name has stuck. The scenarios are 
illustrated below. 


HIGH 

PROBABILITY 

Certainty Effect 

GAINS 

95% chance to win $10,000 
Fear of disappointment 

RISK AVERSE 

Accept unfavorable settlement 

LOSSES 

95% chance to lose $10,000 
Hope to avoid loss 

RISK SEEKING 

Reject favorable settlement 

LOW 

5% chance to win $10,000 

5% chance to lose $10,000 

PROBABILITY 

Hope of large gain 

Fear of large loss 

Possibility Effect 

RISK SEEKING 

RISK AVERSE 


Reject favorable settlement 

Accept unfavorable settlement 



Figure 13 


• The top row in each cell shows an illustrative prospect. 

• The second row characterizes the focal emotion that the prospect 
evokes. 

• The third row indicates how most people behave when offered a 
choice between a gamble and a sure gain (or loss) that corresponds 
to its expected value (for example, between “95% chance to win 
$10,000” and “$9,500 with certainty”). Choices are said to be risk 
averse if the sure thing is preferred, risk seeking if the gamble is 
preferred. 

• The fourth row describes the expected attitudes of a defendant and a 
plaintiff as they discuss a settlement of a civil suit. 


The fourfold pattern of preferences is considered one of the core 
achievements of prospect theory. Three of the four cells are familiar; the 
fourth (top right) was new and unexpected. 


• The top left is the one that Bernoulli discussed: people are averse to 
risk when they consider prospects with a substantial chance to 
achieve a large gain. They are willing to accept less than the 
expected value of a gamble to lock in a sure gain. 

• The possibility effect in the bottom left cell explains why lotteries are 
popular. When the top prize is very large, ticket buyers appear 
indifferent to the fact that their chance of winning is minuscule. A 
lottery ticket is the ultimate example of the possibility effect. Without 
a ticket you cannot win, with a ticket you have a chance, and whether 
the chance is tiny or merely small matters little. Of course, what 
people acquire with a ticket is more than a chance to win; it is the 
right to dream pleasantly of winning. 

• The bottom right cell is where insurance is bought. People are willing 
to pay much more for insurance than expected value—which is how 
insurance companies cover their costs and make their profits. Here 
again, people buy more than protection against an unlikely disaster; 
they eliminate a worry and purchase peace of mind. 



The results for the top right cell initially surprised us. We were accustomed 
to think in terms of risk aversion except for the bottom left cell, where 
lotteries are preferred. When we looked at our choices for bad options, we 
quickly realized that we were just as risk seeking in the domain of losses 
as we were risk averse in the domain of gains. We were not the first to 
observe risk seeking with negative prospects—at least two authors had 
reported that fact, but they had not made much of it. However, we were 
fortunate to have a framework that made the finding of risk seeking easy to 
interpret, and that was a milestone in our thinking. Indeed, we identified 
two reasons for this effect. 

First, there is diminishing sensitivity. The sure loss is very aversive 
because the reaction to a loss of $900 is more than 90% as intense as the 
reaction to a loss of $1,000. The second factor may be even more 
powerful: the decision weight that corresponds to a probability of 90% is 
only about 71, much lower than the probability. The result is that when you 
consider a choice between a sure loss and a gamble with a high 
probability o Bima aty o Bimf a larger loss, diminishing sensitivity makes 
the sure loss more aversive, and the certainty effect reduces the 
aversiveness of the gamble. The same two factors enhance the 
attractiveness of the sure thing and reduce the attractiveness of the 
gamble when the outcomes are positive. 

The shape of the value function and the decision weights both contribute 
to the pattern observed in the top row of table 13. In the bottom row, 
however, the two factors operate in opposite directions: diminishing 
sensitivity continues to favor risk aversion for gains and risk seeking for 
losses, but the overweighting of low probabilities overcomes this effect 
and produces the observed pattern of gambling for gains and caution for 
losses. 

Many unfortunate human situations unfold in the top right cell. This is 
where people who face very bad options take desperate gambles, 
accepting a high probability of making things worse in exchange for a 
small hope of avoiding a large loss. Risk taking of this kind often turns 
manageable failures into disasters. The thought of accepting the large sure 
loss is too painful, and the hope of complete relief too enticing, to make the 
sensible decision that it is time to cut one’s losses. This is where 
businesses that are losing ground to a superior technology waste their 
remaining assets in futile attempts to catch up. Because defeat is so 
difficult to accept, the losing side in wars often fights long past the point at 
which the victory of the other side is certain, and only a matter of time. 



Gambling in the Shadow of the Law 

The legal scholar Chris Guthrie has offered a compelling application of the 
fourfold pattern to two situations in which the plaintiff and the defendant in a 
civil suit consider a possible settlement. The situations differ in the strength 
of the plaintiffs case. 

As in a scenario we saw earlier, you are the plaintiff in a civil suit in 
which you have made a claim for a large sum in damages. The trial is 
going very well and your lawyer cites expert opinion that you have a 95% 
chance to win outright, but adds the caution, “\bu never really know the 
outcome until the jury comes in.” Your lawyer urges you to accept a 
settlement in which you might get only 90% of your claim. You are in the top 
left cell of the fourfold pattern, and the question on your mind is, “Am I 
willing to take even a small chance of getting nothing at all? Even 90% of 
the claim is a great deal of money, and I can walk away with it now.” Two 
emotions are evoked, both driving in the same direction: the attraction of a 
sure (and substantial) gain and the fear of intense disappointment and 
regret if you reject a settlement and lose in court. You can feel the pressure 
that typically leads to cautious behavior in this situation. The plaintiff with a 
strong case is likely to be risk averse. 

Now step into the shoes of the defendant in the same case. Although 
you have not completely given up hope of a decision in your favor, you 
realize that the trial is going poorly. The plaintiffs lawyers have proposed a 
settlement in which you would have to pay 90% of their original claim, and 
it is clear they will not accept less. Will you settle, or will you pursue the 
case? Because you face a high probability of a loss, your situation belongs 
in the top right cell. The temptation to fight on is strong: the settlement that 
the plaintiff has offered is almost as painful as the worst outcome you face, 
and there is still hope of prevailing in court. Here again, two emotions are 
involved: the sure loss is repugnant and the possibility of winning in court is 
highly attractive. A defendant with a weak case is likely to be risk seeking, 
Bima aing, Bim prepared to gamble rather than accept a very unfavorable 
settlement. In the face-off between a risk-averse plaintiff and a risk-seeking 
defendant, the defendant holds the stronger hand. The superior bargaining 
position of the defendant should be reflected in negotiated settlements, 
with the plaintiff settling for less than the statistically expected outcome of 
the trial. This prediction from the fourfold pattern was confirmed by 
experiments conducted with law students and practicing judges, and also 
by analyses of actual negotiations in the shadow of civil trials. 

Now consider “frivolous litigation,” when a plaintiff with a flimsy case files 
a large claim that is most likely to fail in court. Both sides are aware of the 



probabilities, and both know that in a negotiated settlement the plaintiff will 
get only a small fraction of the amount of the claim. The negotiation is 
conducted in the bottom row of the fourfold pattern. The plaintiff is in the 
left-hand cell, with a small chance to win a very large amount; the frivolous 
claim is a lottery ticket for a large prize. Overweighting the small chance of 
success is natural in this situation, leading the plaintiff to be bold and 
aggressive in the negotiation. For the defendant, the suit is a nuisance with 
a small risk of a very bad outcome. Overweighting the small chance of a 
large loss favors risk aversion, and settling for a modest amount is 
equivalent to purchasing insurance against the unlikely event of a bad 
verdict. The shoe is now on the other foot: the plaintiff is willing to gamble 
and the defendant wants to be safe. Plaintiffs with frivolous claims are 
likely to obtain a more generous settlement than the statistics of the 
situation justify. 

The decisions described by the fourfold pattern are not obviously 
unreasonable. You can empathize in each case with the feelings of the 
plaintiff and the defendant that lead them to adopt a combative or an 
accommodating posture. In the long run, however, deviations from 
expected value are likely to be costly. Consider a large organization, the 
City of New Nbrk, and suppose it faces 200 “frivolous” suits each year, 
each with a 5% chance to cost the city $1 million. Suppose further that in 
each case the city could settle the lawsuit for a payment of $100,000. The 
city considers two alternative policies that it will apply to all such cases: 
settle or go to trial. (For simplicity, I ignore legal costs.) 


• If the city litigates all 200 cases, it will lose 10, for a total loss of $10 
million. 

• If the city settles every case for $100,000, its total loss will be $20 
million. 


When you take the long view of many similar decisions, you can see that 
paying a premium to avoid a small risk of a large loss is costly. A similar 
analysis applies to each of the cells of the fourfold pattern: systematic 
deviations from expected value are costly in the long run—and this rule 
applies to both risk aversion and risk seeking. Consistent overweighting of 
improbable outcomes—a feature of intuitive decision making—eventually 
leads to inferior outcomes. 


Speaking Of The Fourfold Pattern 



“He is tempted to settle this frivolous claim to avoid a freak loss, 
however unlikely. That’s overweighting of small probabilities. 
Since he is likely to face many similar problems, he would be 
better off not yielding.” 


“We never let our vacations hang Bima aang Bimon a last-minute 
deal. We’re willing to pay a lot for certainty.” 


“They will not cut their losses so long as there is a chance of 
breaking even. This is risk-seeking in the losses.” 


“They know the risk of a gas explosion is minuscule, but they want 
it mitigated. It’s a possibility effect, and they want peace of mind.” 



Rare Events 


I visited Israel several times during a period in which suicide bombings in 
buses were relatively common—though of course quite rare in absolute 
terms. There were altogether 23 bombings between December 2001 and 
September 2004, which had caused a total of 236 fatalities. The number of 
daily bus riders in Israel was approximately 1.3 million at that time. For any 
traveler, the risks were tiny, but that was not how the public felt about it. 
People avoided buses as much as they could, and many travelers spent 
their time on the bus anxiously scanning their neighbors for packages or 
bulky clothes that might hide a bomb. 

I did not have much occasion to travel on buses, as I was driving a 
rented car, but I was chagrined to discover that my behavior was also 
affected. I found that I did not like to stop next to a bus at a red light, and I 
drove away more quickly than usual when the light changed. I was 
ashamed of myself, because of course I knew better. I knew that the risk 
was truly negligible, and that any effect at all on my actions would assign an 
inordinately high “decision weight” to a minuscule probability. In fact, I was 
more likely to be injured in a driving accident than by stopping near a bus. 
But my avoidance of buses was not motivated by a rational concern for 
survival. What drove me was the experience of the moment: being next to a 
bus made me think of bombs, and these thoughts were unpleasant. I was 
avoiding buses because I wanted to think of something else. 

My experience illustrates how terrorism works and why it is so effective: 
it induces an availability cascade. An extremely vivid image of death and 
damage, constantly reinforced by media attention and frequent 
conversations, becomes highly accessible, especially if it is associated 
with a specific situation such as the sight of a bus. The emotional arousal 
is associative, automatic, and uncontrolled, and it produces an impulse for 
protective action. System 2 may “know” that the probability is low, but this 
knowledge does not eliminate the self-generated discomfort and the wish 
to avoid it. System 1 cannot be turned off. The emotion is not only 
disproportionate to the probability, it is also insensitive to the exact level of 
probability. Suppose that two cities have been warned about the presence 
of suicide bombers. Residents of one city are told that two bombers are 
ready to strike. Residents of another city are told of a single bomber. Their 
risk is lower by half, but do they feel much safer? 


Many stores in New York City sell lottery tickets, and business is good. The 
psychology of high-prize lotteries is similar to the psychology of terrorism. 



The thrilling possibility of winning the big prize is shared by the community 
and re Cmuninforced by conversations at work and at home. Buying a 
ticket is immediately rewarded by pleasant fantasies, just as avoiding a 
bus was immediately rewarded by relief from fear. In both cases, the actual 
probability is inconsequential; only possibility matters. The original 
formulation of prospect theory included the argument that “highly unlikely 
events are either ignored or overweighted,” but it did not specify the 
conditions under which one or the other will occur, nor did it propose a 
psychological interpretation of it. My current view of decision weights has 
been strongly influenced by recent research on the role of emotions and 
vividness in decision making. Overweighting of unlikely outcomes is rooted 
in System 1 features that are familiar by now. Emotion and vividness 
influence fluency, availability, and judgments of probability—and thus 
account for our excessive response to the few rare events that we do not 
ignore. 


Overestimation and Overweighting 


What is your judgment of the probability that the next president of 
the United States will be a third-party candidate? 


How much will you pay for a bet in which you receive $1,000 if the 
next president of the United States is a third-party candidate, and 
no money otherwise? 

The two questions are different but obviously related. The first asks you to 
assess the probability of an unlikely event. The second invites you to put a 
decision weight on the same event, by placing a bet on it. 

How do people make the judgments and how do they assign decision 
weights? We start from two simple answers, then qualify them. Here are 
the oversimplified answers: 


• People overestimate the probabilities of unlikely events. 

• People overweight unlikely events in their decisions. 


Although overestimation and overweighting are distinct phenomena, the 
same psychological mechanisms are involved in both: focused attention, 



confirmation bias, and cognitive ease. 

Specific descriptions trigger the associative machinery of System 1. 
When you thought about the unlikely victory of a third-party candidate, your 
associative system worked in its usual confirmatory mode, selectively 
retrieving evidence, instances, and images that would make the statement 
true. The process was biased, but it was not an exercise in fantasy. You 
looked for a plausible scenario that conforms to the constraints of reality; 
you did not simply imagine the Fairy of the West installing a third-party 
president. Your judgment of probability was ultimately determined by the 
cognitive ease, or fluency, with which a plausible scenario came to mind. 

\bu do not always focus on the event you are asked to estimate. If the 
target event is very likely, you focus on its alternative. Consider this 
example: 


What is the probability that a baby born in your local hospital will 
be released within three days? 

You were asked to estimate the probability of the baby going home, but 
you almost certainly focused on the events that might cause a baby not to 
be released within the normal period. Our mind has a useful capability to 
Bmun q to Bmufocus spontaneously on whatever is odd, different, or 
unusual. You quickly realized that it is normal for babies in the United 
States (not all countries have the same standards) to be released within 
two or three days of birth, so your attention turned to the abnormal 
alternative. The unlikely event became focal. The availability heuristic is 

likely to be evoked: your judgment was probably determined by the number 
of scenarios of medical problems you produced and by the ease with 
which they came to mind. Because you were in confirmatory mode, there is 
a good chance that your estimate of the frequency of problems was too 
high. 

The probability of a rare event is most likely to be overestimated when 
the alternative is not fully specified. My favorite example comes from a 
study that the psychologist Craig Fox conducted while he was Amos’s 
student. Fox recruited fans of professional basketball and elicited several 
judgments and decisions concerning the winner of the NBA playoffs. In 
particular, he asked them to estimate the probability that each of the eight 
participating teams would win the playoff; the victory of each team in turn 
was the focal event. 

\bu can surely guess what happened, but the magnitude of the effect 
that Fox observed may surprise you. Imagine a fan who has been asked to 
estimate the chances that the Chicago Bulls will win the tournament. The 
focal event is well defined, but its alternative—one of the other seven 



teams winning—is diffuse and less evocative. The fan’s memory and 
imagination, operating in confirmatory mode, are trying to construct a 
victory for the Bulls. When the same person is next asked to assess the 
chances of the Lakers, the same selective activation will work in favor of 
that team. The eight best professional basketball teams in the United 
States are all very good, and it is possible to imagine even a relatively 
weak team among them emerging as champion. The result: the probability 
judgments generated successively for the eight teams added up to 240%! 
This pattern is absurd, of course, because the sum of the chances of the 
eight events must add up to 100%. The absurdity disappeared when the 
same judges were asked whether the winner would be from the Eastern or 
the Western conference. The focal event and its alternative were equally 
specific in that question and the judgments of their probabilities added up 
to 100%. 

To assess decision weights, Fox also invited the basketball fans to bet 
on the tournament result. They assigned a cash equivalent to each bet (a 
cash amount that was just as attractive as playing the bet). Winning the bet 
would earn a payoff of $160. The sum of the cash equivalents for the eight 
individual teams was $287. An average participant who took all eight bets 
would be guaranteed a loss of $127! The participants surely knew that 
there were eight teams in the tournament and that the average payoff for 
betting on all of them could not exceed $160, but they overweighted 
nonetheless. The fans not only overestimated the probability of the events 
they focused on—they were also much too willing to bet on them. 

These findings shed new light on the planning fallacy and other 
manifestations of optimism. The successful execution of a plan is specific 
and easy to imagine when one tries to forecast the outcome of a project. In 
contrast, the alternative of failure is diffuse, because there are innumerable 
ways for things to go wrong. Entrepreneurs and the investors who evaluate 
their prospects are prone both to overestimate their chances and to 
overweight their estimates. 

Vivid Outcomes 

As we have seen, prospect theory differs from utility theory in the rel Bmun 
q rel Bmuationship it suggests between probability and decision weight. In 
utility theory, decision weights and probabilities are the same. The 
decision weight of a sure thing is 100, and the weight that corresponds to 
a 90% chance is exactly 90, which is 9 times more than the decision 
weight for a 10% chance. In prospect theory, variations of probability have 
less effect on decision weights. An experiment that I mentioned earlier 



found that the decision weight for a 90% chance was 71.2 and the 
decision weight for a 10% chance was 18.6. The ratio of the probabilities 
was 9.0, but the ratio of the decision weights was only 3.83, indicating 
insufficient sensitivity to probability in that range. In both theories, the 
decision weights depend only on probability, not on the outcome. Both 
theories predict that the decision weight for a 90% chance is the same for 
winning $100, receiving a dozen roses, or getting an electric shock. This 
theoretical prediction turns out to be wrong. 

Psychologists at the University of Chicago published an article with the 
attractive title “Money, Kisses, and Electric Shocks: On the Affective 
Psychology of Risk.” Their finding was that the valuation of gambles was 
much less sensitive to probability when the (fictitious) outcomes were 
emotional (“meeting and kissing your favorite movie star” or “getting a 
painful, but not dangerous, electric shock”) than when the outcomes were 
gains or losses of cash. This was not an isolated finding. Other 
researchers had found, using physiological measures such as heart rate, 
that the fear of an impending electric shock was essentially uncorrelated 
with the probability of receiving the shock. The mere possibility of a shock 
triggered the full-blown fear response. The Chicago team proposed that 
“affect-laden imagery” overwhelmed the response to probability. Ten years 
later, a team of psychologists at Princeton challenged that conclusion. 

The Princeton team argued that the low sensitivity to probability that had 
been observed for emotional outcomes is normal. Gambles on money are 
the exception. The sensitivity to probability is relatively high for these 
gambles, because they have a definite expected value. 

What amount of cash is as attractive as each of these gambles? 


A. 84% chance to win $59 

B. 84% chance to receive one dozen red roses in a glass vase 

What do you notice? The salient difference is that question A is much 
easier than question B. 'fou did not stop to compute the expected value of 
the bet, but you probably knew quickly that it is not far from $50 (in fact it is 
$49.56), and the vague estimate was sufficient to provide a helpful anchor 
as you searched for an equally attractive cash gift. No such anchor is 
available for question B, which is therefore much harder to answer. 
Respondents also assessed the cash equivalent of gambles with a 21% 
chance to win the two outcomes. As expected, the difference between the 
high-probability and low-probability gambles was much more pronounced 
for the money than for the roses. 



To bolster their argument that insensitivity to probability is not caused by 
emotion, the Princeton team compared willingness to pay to avoid 
gambles: 


21% chance (or 84% chance) to spend a weekend painting 
someone’s three-bedroom apartment 


21% chance (or 84% chance) to clean three stalls in a dormitory 
bath Bmun qbath Bmuroom after a weekend of use 

The second outcome is surely much more emotional than the first, but the 
decision weights for the two outcomes did not differ. Evidently, the intensity 
of emotion is not the answer. 

Another experiment yielded a surprising result. The participants 
received explicit price information along with the verbal description of the 
prize. An example could be: 

84% chance to win: A dozen red roses in a glass vase. Value 
$59. 


21% chance to win: A dozen red roses in a glass vase. Value 
$59. 

It is easy to assess the expected monetary value of these gambles, but 
adding a specific monetary value did not alter the results: evaluations 
remained insensitive to probability even in that condition. People who 
thought of the gift as a chance to get roses did not use price information as 
an anchor in evaluating the gamble. As scientists sometimes say, this is a 
surprising finding that is trying to tell us something. What story is it trying to 
tell us? 

The story, I believe, is that a rich and vivid representation of the 
outcome, whether or not it is emotional, reduces the role of probability in 
the evaluation of an uncertain prospect. This hypothesis suggests a 
prediction, in which I have reasonably high confidence: adding irrelevant 
but vivid details to a monetary outcome also disrupts calculation. Compare 
your cash equivalents for the following outcomes: 

21 % (or 84%) chance to receive $59 next Monday 


21% (or 84%) chance to receive a large blue cardboard 



envelope containing $59 next Monday morning 

The new hypothesis is that there will be less sensitivity to probability in the 
second case, because the blue envelope evokes a richer and more fluent 
representation than the abstract notion of a sum of money. You constructed 
the event in your mind, and the vivid image of the outcome exists there 
even if you know that its probability is low. Cognitive ease contributes to 
the certainty effect as well: when you hold a vivid image of an event, the 
possibility of its not occurring is also represented vividly, and 
overweighted. The combination of an enhanced possibility effect with an 
enhanced certainty effect leaves little room for decision weights to change 
between chances of 21% and 84%. 

Vivid Probabilities 

The idea that fluency, vividness, and the ease of imagining contribute to 
decision weights gains support from many other observations. Participants 
in a well-known experiment are given a choice of drawing a marble from 
one of two urns, in which red marbles win a prize: 

Urn A contains 10 marbles, of which 1 is red. 

Urn B contains 100 marbles, of which 8 are red. 

Which urn would you choose? The chances of winning are 10% in urn A 
and 8% in urn B, so making the right choice should be easy, but it is not: 
about 30%-40% of students choose the urn Bmun q urn Bmu with the 
larger number of winning marbles, rather than the urn that provides a better 
chance of winning. Seymour Epstein has argued that the results illustrate 
the superficial processing characteristic of System 1 (which he calls the 
experiential system). 

As you might expect, the remarkably foolish choices that people make in 
this situation have attracted the attention of many researchers. The bias 
has been given several names; following Paul Slovic I will call it 
denominator neglect. If your attention is drawn to the winning marbles, you 
do not assess the number of nonwinning marbles with the same care. Vivid 
imagery contributes to denominator neglect, at least as I experience it. 
When I think of the small urn, I see a single red marble on a vaguely 
defined background of white marbles. When I think of the larger urn, I see 
eight winning red marbles on an indistinct background of white marbles, 
which creates a more hopeful feeling. The distinctive vividness of the 
winning marbles increases the decision weight of that event, enhancing the 



possibility effect. Of course, the same will be true of the certainty effect. If I 
have a 90% chance of winning a prize, the event of not winning will be 
more salient if 10 of 100 marbles are “losers” than if 1 of 10 marbles yields 
the same outcome. 

The idea of denominator neglect helps explain why different ways of 
communicating risks vary so much in their effects. You read that “a vaccine 
that protects children from a fatal disease carries a 0.001% risk of 
permanent disability.” The risk appears small. Now consider another 
description of the same risk: “One of 100,000 vaccinated children will be 
permanently disabled.” The second statement does something to your 
mind that the first does not: it calls up the image of an individual child who 
is permanently disabled by a vaccine; the 999,999 safely vaccinated 
children have faded into the background. As predicted by denominator 
neglect, low-probability events are much more heavily weighted when 
described in terms of relative frequencies (how many) than when stated in 
more abstract terms of “chances,” “risk,” or “probability” (how likely). As we 
have seen, System 1 is much better at dealing with individuals than 
categories. 

The effect of the frequency format is large. In one study, people who saw 
information about “a disease that kills 1,286 people out of every 10,000” 
judged it as more dangerous than people who were told about “a disease 
that kills 24.14% of the population.” The first disease appears more 
threatening than the second, although the former risk is only half as large 
as the latter! In an even more direct demonstration of denominator neglect, 
“a disease that kills 1,286 people out of every 10,000” was judged more 
dangerous than a disease that “kills 24.4 out of 100.” The effect would 
surely be reduced or eliminated if participants were asked for a direct 
comparison of the two formulations, a task that explicitly calls for System 2. 
Life, however, is usually a between-subjects experiment, in which you see 
only one formulation at a time. It would take an exceptionally active System 
2 to generate alternative formulations of the one you see and to discover 
that they evoke a different response. 

Experienced forensic psychologists and psychiatrists are not immune to 
the effects of the format in which risks are expressed. In one experiment, 
professionals evaluated whether it was safe to discharge from the 
psychiatric hospital a patient, Mr. Jones, with a history of violence. The 
information they received included an expert’s assessment of the risk. The 
same statistics were described in two ways: 

Patients similar to Mr. Jones are estimated to have a 10% 
probability of committing an act of violence against others during 
the first several months after discharge. 



Of every 100 patients similar to Mr. Jones, 10 are estimated to 
commit an act of violence against others during the first several 
months after discharge. 

The professionals who saw the frequency format were almost twice as 
likely to deny the discharge (41%, compared to 21% in the probability 
format). The more vivid description produces a higher decision weight for 
the same probability. 

The power of format creates opportunities for manipulation, which 
people with an axe to grind know how to exploit. Slovic and his colleagues 
cite an article that states that “approximately 1,000 homicides a year are 
committed nationwide by seriously mentally ill individuals who are not 
taking their medication.” Another way of expressing the same fact is that 
“1,000 out of 273,000,000 Americans will die in this manner each year.” 
Another is that “the annual likelihood of being killed by such an individual is 
approximately 0.00036%.” Still another: “1,000 Americans will die in this 
manner each year, or less than one-thirtieth the number who will die of 
suicide and about one-fourth the number who will die of laryngeal cancer.” 
Slovic points out that “these advocates are quite open about their 
motivation: theywanf to frighten the general public about violence by 
people with mental disorder, in the hope that this fear will translate into 
increased funding for mental health services.” 

A good attorney who wishes to cast doubt on DNA evidence will not tell 
the jury that “the chance of a false match is 0.1 %.” The statement that “a 
false match occurs in 1 of 1,000 capital cases” is far more likely to pass 
the threshold of reasonable doubt. The jurors hearing those words are 
invited to generate the image of the man who sits before them in the 
courtroom being wrongly convicted because of flawed DNA evidence. The 
prosecutor, of course, will favor the more abstract frame—hoping to fill the 
jurors’ minds with decimal points. 

Decisions from Global Impressions 

The evidence suggests the hypothesis that focal attention and salience 
contribute to both the overestimation of unlikely events and the 
overweighting of unlikely outcomes. Salience is enhanced by mere 
mention of an event, by its vividness, and by the format in which probability 
is described. There are exceptions, of course, in which focusing on an 
event does not raise its probability: cases in which an erroneous theory 
makes an event appear impossible even when you think about it, or cases 



in which an inability to imagine how an outcome might come about leaves 
you convinced that it will not happen. The bias toward overestimation and 
oven/veighting of salient events is not an absolute rule, but it is large and 
robust. 

There has been much interest in recent years in studies of choice from 
experience, which follow different rules from the choices from description 
that are analyzed in prospect theory. Participants in a typical experiment 
face two buttons. When pressed, each button produces either a monetary 
reward or nothing, and the outcome is drawn randomly according to the 
specifications of a prospect (for example, “5% to win $12” or “95% chance 
to win $1”). The process is truly random, s Bmun qm, s Bmuo there is no 
guarantee that the sample a participant sees exactly represents the 
statistical setup. The expected values associated with the two buttons are 
approximately equal, but one is riskier (more variable) than the other. (For 
example, one button may produce $10 on 5% of the trials and the other $1 
on 50% of the trials). Choice from experience is implemented by exposing 
the participant to many trials in which she can observe the consequences 
of pressing one button or another. On the critical trial, she chooses one of 
the two buttons, and she earns the outcome on that trial. Choice from 
description is realized by showing the subject the verbal description of the 
risky prospect associated with each button (such as “5% to win $12”) and 
asking her to choose one. As expected from prospect theory, choice from 
description yields a possibility effect—rare outcomes are overweighted 
relative to their probability. In sharp contrast, oven/ve ighting is never 
observed in choice from experience, and underweighting is common. 

The experimental situation of choice by experience is intended to 
represent many situations in which we are exposed to variable outcomes 
from the same source. A restaurant that is usually good may occasionally 
serve a brilliant or an awful meal. Your friend is usually good company, but 
he sometimes turns moody and aggressive. California is prone to 
earthquakes, but they happen rarely. The results of many experiments 
suggest that rare events are not overweighted when we make decisions 
such as choosing a restaurant or tying down the boiler to reduce 
earthquake damage. 

The interpretation of choice from experience is not yet settled, but there 
is general agreement on one major cause of underweighting of rare 
events, both in experiments and in the real world: many participants never 
experience the rare event! Most Californians have never experienced a 
major earthquake, and in 2007 no banker had personally experienced a 
devastating financial crisis. Ralph Hertwig and Ido Erev note that “chances 
of rare events (such as the burst of housing bubbles) receive less impact 



than they deserve according to their objective probabilities.” They point to 
the public’s tepid response to long-term environmental threats as an 
example. 

These examples of neglect are both important and easily explained, but 
underweighting also occurs when people have actually experienced the 
rare event. Suppose you have a complicated question that two colleagues 
on your floor could probably answer. Nbu have known them both for years 
and have had many occasions to observe and experience their character. 
Adele is fairly consistent and generally helpful, though not exceptional on 
that dimension. Brian is not quite as friendly and helpful as Adele most of 
the time, but on some occasions he has been extremely generous with his 
time and advice. Whom will you approach? 

Consider two possible views of this decision: 


• It is a choice between two gambles. Adele is closer to a sure thing; 
the prospect of Brian is more likely to yield a slightly inferior 
outcome, with a low probability of a very good one. The rare event 
will be overweighted by a possibility effect, favoring Brian. 

• It is a choice between your global impressions of Adele and Brian. 
The good and the bad experiences you have had are pooled in your 
representation of their normal behavior. Unless the rare event is so 
extreme that it comes to mind separately (Brian once verbally 
abused a colleague who asked for his help), the norm will be biased 
toward typical and recent instances, favoring Adele. 


In a two-system mind, the second interpretation a Bmun qon a Bmuppears 
far more plausible. System 1 generates global representations of Adele 
and Brian, which include an emotional attitude and a tendency to approach 
or avoid. Nothing beyond a comparison of these tendencies is needed to 
determine the door on which you will knock. Unless the rare event comes 
to your mind explicitly, it will not be overweighted. Applying the same idea 
to the experiments on choice from experience is straightforward. As they 
are observed generating outcomes over time, the two buttons develop 
integrated “personalities” to which emotional responses are attached. 

The conditions under which rare events are ignored or overweighted are 
better understood now than they were when prospect theory was 
formulated. The probability of a rare event will (often, not always) be 
overestimated, because of the confirmatory bias of memory. Thinking 
about that event, you try to make it true in your mind. A rare event will be 



overweighted if it specifically attracts attention. Separate attention is 
effectively guaranteed when prospects are described explicitly (“99% 
chance to win $1,000, and 1% chance to win nothing”). Obsessive 
concerns (the bus in Jerusalem), vivid images (the roses), concrete 
representations (1 of 1,000), and explicit reminders (as in choice from 
description) all contribute to overweighting. And when there is no 
overweighting, there will be neglect. When it comes to rare probabilities, 
our mind is not designed to get things quite right. For the residents of a 
planet that may be exposed to events no one has yet experienced, this is 
not good news. 


Speaking of Rare Events 


“Tsunamis are very rare even in Japan, but the image is so vivid 
and compelling that tourists are bound to overestimate their 
probability.” 


“It’s the familiar disaster cycle. Begin by exaggeration and 
oven/veighting, then neglect sets in.” 


“We shouldn’t focus on a single scenario, or we will overestimate 
its probability. Let’s set up specific alternatives and make the 
probabilities add up to 100%.” 


“They want people to be worried by the risk. That’s why they 
describe it as 1 death per 1,000. They’re counting on 
denominator neglect.” 



Risk Policies 


Imagine that you face the following pair of concurrent decisions. First 
examine both decisions, then make your choices. 

Decision (i): Choose between 


A. sure gain of $240 

B. 25% chance to gain $1,000 and 75% chance to gain nothing 


Decision (ii): Choose between 


C. sure loss of $750 

D. 75% chance to lose $1,000 and 25% chance to lose nothing 

This pair of choice problems has an important place in the history of 
prospect theory, and it has new things to tell us about rationality. As you 
skimmed the two problems, your initial reaction to the sure things (A and 
C) was attraction to the first and aversion to the second. The emotional 
evaluation of “sure gain” and “sure loss” is an automatic reaction of System 
1, which certainly occurs before the more effortful (and optional) 
computation of the expected values of the two gambles (respectively, a 
gain of $250 and a loss of $750). Most people’s choices correspond to the 
predilections of System 1, and large majorities prefer A to B and D to C. 
As in many other choices that involve moderate or high probabilities, 
people tend to be risk averse in the domain of gains and risk seeking in 
the domain of losses. In the original experiment that Amos and I carried 
out, 73% of respondents chose A in decision i and D in decision ii and 
only 3% favored the combination of B and C. 

\bu were asked to examine both options before making your first 
choice, and you probably did so. But one thing you surely did not do: you 
did not compute the possible results of the four combinations of choices (A 
and C, A and D, B and C, B and D) to determine which combination you 
like best. Your separate preferences for the two problems were intuitively 
compelling and there was no reason to expect that they could lead to 
trouble. Furthermore, combining the two decision problems is a laborious 
exercise that you would need paper and pencil to complete. You did not do 
it. Now consider the following choice problem: 



AD. 25% chance to win $240 and 75% chance to lose $760 
BC. 25% chance to win $250 and 75% chance to lose $750 


This choice is easy! Option BC actually dominates option AD (the 
technical term for one option being unequivocally better than another). You 
already know what comes next. The dominant option in AD is the 
combination of the two rejected options in the first pair of decision 
problems, the one that only 3% of respondents favored in our original 
study. The inferior option BC was preferred by 73% of respondents. 

Broad or Narrow? 

This set of choices has a lot to tell us about the limits of human rationality. 
For one thing, it helps us see the logical consistency of Human 
preferences for what it is—a hopeless mirage. Have another look at the 
last problem, the easy one. Would you have imagined the possibility of 
decomposing this obvious choice problem into a pair of problems that 
would lead a large majority of people to choose an inferior option? This is 
generally true: every simple choice formulated in terms of gains and losses 
can be deconstructed in innumerable ways into a combination of choices, 
yielding preferences that are likely to be inconsistent. 

The example also shows that it is costly to be risk averse for gains and 
risk seeking for losses. These attitudes make you willing to pay a premium 
to obtain a sure gain rather than face a gamble, and also willing to pay a 
premium (in expected value) to avoid a sure loss. Both payments come out 
of the same pocket, and when you face both kinds of problems at once, the 
discrepant attitudes are unlikely to be optimal. 

There were tw Bght hecome oo ways of construing decisions i and ii: 


• narrow framing: a sequence of two simple decisions, considered 
separately 

• broad framing: a single comprehensive decision, with four options 


Broad framing was obviously superior in this case. Indeed, it will be 
superior (or at least not inferior) in every case in which several decisions 
are to be contemplated together. Imagine a longer list of 5 simple (binary) 
decisions to be considered simultaneously. The broad (comprehensive) 
frame consists of a single choice with 32 options. Narrow framing will yield 
a sequence of 5 simple choices. The sequence of 5 choices will be one of 



the 32 options of the broad frame. Will it be the best? Perhaps, but not very 
likely. A rational agent will of course engage in broad framing, but Humans 
are by nature narrow framers. 

The ideal of logical consistency, as this example shows, is not 
achievable by our limited mind. Because we are susceptible to WY SIATI 
and averse to mental effort, we tend to make decisions as problems arise, 
even when we are specifically instructed to consider them jointly. We have 
neither the inclination nor the mental resources to enforce consistency on 
our preferences, and our preferences are not magically set to be coherent, 
as they are in the rational-agent model. 

Samuelson’s Problem 

The great Paul Samuelson—a giant among the economists of the 
twentieth century—famously asked a friend whether he would accept a 
gamble on the toss of a coin in which he could lose $100 or win $200. His 
friend responded, “I won’t bet because I would feel the $100 loss more 
than the $200 gain. But I’ll take you on if you promise to let me make 100 
such bets.” Unless you are a decision theorist, you probably share the 
intuition of Samuelson’s friend, that playing a very favorable but risky 
gamble multiple times reduces the subjective risk. Samuelson found his 
friend’s answer interesting and went on to analyze it. He proved that under 
some very specific conditions, a utility maximizer who rejects a single 
gamble should also reject the offer of many. 

Remarkably, Samuelson did not seem to mind the fact that his proof, 
which is of course valid, led to a conclusion that violates common sense, if 
not rationality: the offer of a hundred gambles is so attractive that no sane 
person would reject it. Matthew Rabin and Richard Thaler pointed out that 
“the aggregated gamble of one hundred 50-50 lose $100/gain $200 bets 
has an expected return of $5,000, with only a 1/2,300 chance of losing any 
money and merely a 1/62,000 chance of losing more than $1,000.” Their 
point, of course, is that if utility theory can be consistent with such a foolish 
preference under any circumstances, then something must be wrong with it 
as a model of rational choice. Samuelson had not seen Rabin’s proof of 
the absurd consequences of severe loss aversion for small bets, but he 
would surely not have been surprised by it. His willingness even to 
consider the possibility that it could be rational to reject the package 
testifies to the powerful hold of the rational model. 

Let us assume that a very simple value function describes the 
preferences of Samuelson’s friend (call him Sam). To express his aversion 
to losses Sam first rewrites the bet, after multiplying each loss by a factor 



of 2. He then computes the expected value of the rewritten bet. Here are 
the results, for one, two, or three tosses. They are sufficiently instructive to 
deserve some Bght iciof 2 


Expected Value 


One toss 

(50% lose 100; 50% win 200) 

50 

Losses doubled 

(50% lose 200; 50% win 200) 

0 

Two tosses 

(25% lose 200; 50% win 100; 25% win 400) 

100 

Losses doubled 

(25% lose 400; 50% win 100; 25% win 400) 

50 

Three tosses 

(12.5% lose 300; 37.5% win 0; 37.5% win 300; 
12.5% win 600) 

150 

Losses doubled 

(12.5% lose 600; 37.5% win 0; 37.5% win 300; 
12.5% win 600) 

112.5 


You can see in the display that the gamble has an expected value of 50. 
However, one toss is worth nothing to Sam because he feels that the pain 
of losing a dollar is twice as intense as the pleasure of winning a dollar. 
After rewriting the gamble to reflect his loss aversion, Sam will find that the 
value of the gamble is 0. 

Now consider two tosses. The chances of losing have gone down to 
25%. The two extreme outcomes (lose 200 or win 400) cancel out in value; 
they are equally likely, and the losses are weighted twice as much as the 
gain. But the intermediate outcome (one loss, one gain) is positive, and so 
is the compound gamble as a whole. Now you can see the cost of narrow 
framing and the magic of aggregating gambles. Here are two favorable 
gambles, which individually are worth nothing to Sam. If he encounters the 
offer on two separate occasions, he will turn it down both times. However, 
if he bundles the two offers together, they are jointly worth $50! 

Things get even better when three gambles are bundled. The extreme 
outcomes still cancel out, but they have become less significant. The third 
toss, although worthless if evaluated on its own, has added $62.50 to the 
total value of the package. By the time Sam is offered five gambles, the 
expected value of the offer will be $250, his probability of losing anything 
will be 18.75%, and his cash equivalent will be $203,125. The notable 
aspect of this story is that Sam never wavers in his aversion to losses. 
However, the aggregation of favorable gambles rapidly reduces the 






probability of losing, and the impact of loss aversion on his preferences 
diminishes accordingly. 

Now I have a sermon ready for Sam if he rejects the offer of a single 
highly favorable gamble played once, and for you if you share his 
unreasonable aversion to losses: 

I sympathize with your aversion to losing any gamble, but it is 
costing you a lot of money. Please consider this question: Are 
you on your deathbed? Is this the last offer of a small favorable 
gamble that you will ever consider? Of course, you are unlikely to 
be offered exactly this gamble again, but you will have many 
opportunities to consider attractive gambles with stakes that are 
very small relative to your wealth. You will do yourself a large 
financial favor if you are able to see each of these gambles as 
part of a bundle of small gambles and rehearse the mantra that 
will get you significantly closer to economic rationality: you win a 
few, you lose a few. The main purpose of the mantra is to control 
your emotional response when you do lose. If you can trust it to be 
effective, you should remind yourself of it when deciding whether 
or not to accept a small risk with positive expected value. 
Remember these qualifications when using the mantra: 


• It works when the gambles are genuinely independent of each other; 
it does not apply to multiple investments in the same industry, which 
would all go bad together. 

• It works only when the possible loss does not cause you to worry 
about your total wealth. If you would take the loss as significant bad 
news about your economic future, watch it! 

• It should not be applied to long shots, where the probability of 
winning is very small for each bet. 


If you have the emotional discipline that this rule requires, Bght I d 
for e you will never consider a small gamble in isolation or be loss 
averse for a small gamble until you are actually on your deathbed 
—and not even then. 


This advice is not impossible to follow. Experienced traders in financial 



markets live by it every day, shielding themselves from the pain of losses 
b y broad framing. As was mentioned earlier, we now know that 
experimental subjects could be almost cured of their loss aversion (in a 
particular context) by inducing them to “think like a trader,” just as 
experienced baseball card traders are not as susceptible to the 
endowment effect as novices are. Students made risky decisions (to 
accept or reject gambles in which they could lose) under different 
instructions. In the narrow-framing condition, they were told to “make each 
decision as if it were the only one” and to accept their emotions. The 
instructions for broad framing of a decision included the phrases “imagine 
yourself as a trader,” “you do this all the time,” and “treat it as one of many 
monetary decisions, which will sum together to produce a ‘portfolio.’” The 
experimenters assessed the subjects’ emotional response to gains and 
losses by physiological measures, including changes in the electrical 
conductance of the skin that are used in lie detection. As expected, broad 
framing blunted the emotional reaction to losses and increased the 
willingness to take risks. 

The combination of loss aversion and narrow framing is a costly curse. 
Individual investors can avoid that curse, achieving the emotional benefits 
of broad framing while also saving time and agony, by reducing the 
frequency with which they check how well their investments are doing. 
Closely following daily fluctuations is a losing proposition, because the 
pain of the frequent small losses exceeds the pleasure of the equally 
frequent small gains. Once a quarter is enough, and may be more than 
enough for individual investors. In addition to improving the emotional 
quality of life, the deliberate avoidance of exposure to short-term outcomes 
improves the quality of both decisions and outcomes. The typical short¬ 
term reaction to bad news is increased loss aversion. Investors who get 
aggregated feedback receive such news much less often and are likely to 
be less risk averse and to end up richer. You are also less prone to 
useless churning of your portfolio if you don’t know how every stock in it is 
doing every day (or every week or even every month). A commitment not to 
change one’s position for several periods (the equivalent of “locking in” an 
investment) improves financial performance. 

Risk Policies 

Decision makers who are prone to narrow framing construct a preference 
every time they face a risky choice. They would do better by having a risk 
policy that they routinely apply whenever a relevant problem arises. 
Familiar examples of risk policies are “always take the highest possible 



deductible when purchasing insurance” and “never buy extended 
warranties.” A risk policy is a broad frame. In the insurance examples, you 
expect the occasional loss of the entire deductible, or the occasional 
failure of an uninsured product. The relevant issue is your ability to reduce 
or eliminate the pain of the occasional loss by the thought that the policy 
that left you exposed to it will almost certainly be financially advantageous 
over the long run. 

A risk policy that aggregates decisions is analogous to the outside view 
of planning problems that I discussed earlier. The outside view shift s the 
focus from the specifics of the current situation to Bght pecicy tthe 
statistics of outcomes in similar situations. The outside view is a broad 
frame for thinking about plans. A risk policy is a broad frame that embeds 
a particular risky choice in a set of similar choices. 

The outside view and the risk policy are remedies against two distinct 
biases that affect many decisions: the exaggerated optimism of the 
planning fallacy and the exaggerated caution induced by loss aversion. 
The two biases oppose each other. Exaggerated optimism protects 
individuals and organizations from the paralyzing effects of loss aversion; 
loss aversion protects them from the follies of overconfident optimism. The 
upshot is rather comfortable for the decision maker. Optimists believe that 
the decisions they make are more prudent than they really are, and loss- 
averse decision makers correctly reject marginal propositions that they 
might otherwise accept. There is no guarantee, of course, that the biases 
cancel out in every situation. An organization that could eliminate both 
excessive optimism and excessive loss aversion should do so. The 
combination of the outside view with a risk policy should be the goal. 

Richard Thaler tells of a discussion about decision making he had with 
the top managers of the 25 divisions of a large company. He asked them 
to consider a risky option in which, with equal probabilities, they could lose 
a large amount of the capital they controlled or earn double that amount. 
None of the executives was willing to take such a dangerous gamble. 
Thaler then turned to the CEO of the company, who was also present, and 
asked for his opinion. Without hesitation, the CEO answered, “I would like 
all of them to accept their risks.” In the context of that conversation, it was 
natural for the CEO to adopt a broad frame that encompassed all 25 bets. 
Like Sam facing 100 coin tosses, he could count on statistical aggregation 
to mitigate the overall risk. 

Speaking of Risk Policies 


“Tell her to think like a trader! You win a few, you lose a few.” 



“I decided to evaluate my portfolio only once a quarter. I am too 
loss averse to make sensible decisions in the face of daily price 
fluctuations.” 


“They never buy extended warranties. That’s their risk policy.” 


“Each of our executives is loss averse in his or her domain. 
That’s perfectly natural, but the result is that the organization is not 
taking enough risk.” 



Keeping Score 


Except for the very poor, for whom income coincides with survival, the main 
motivators of money-seeking are not necessarily economic. For the 
billionaire looking for the extra billion, and indeed for the participant in an 
experimental economics project looking for the extra dollar, money is a 
proxy for points on a scale of self-regard and achievement. These rewards 
and punishments, promises and threats, are all in our heads. We carefully 
keep score of them. They shape o C Th5ur preferences and motivate our 
actions, like the incentives provided in the social environment. As a result, 
we refuse to cut losses when doing so would admit failure, we are biased 
against actions that could lead to regret, and we draw an illusory but sharp 
distinction between omission and commission, not doing and doing, 
because the sense of responsibility is greater for one than for the other. 
The ultimate currency that rewards or punishes is often emotional, a form 
of mental self-dealing that inevitably creates conflicts of interest when the 
individual acts as an agent on behalf of an organization. 

Mental Accounts 

Richard Thaler has been fascinated for many years by analogies between 
the world of accounting and the mental accounts that we use to organize 
and run our lives, with results that are sometimes foolish and sometimes 
very helpful. Mental accounts come in several varieties. We hold our money 
in different accounts, which are sometimes physical, sometimes only 
mental. We have spending money, general savings, earmarked savings for 
our children’s education or for medical emergencies. There is a clear 
hierarchy in our willingness to draw on these accounts to cover current 
needs. We use accounts for self-control purposes, as in making a 
household budget, limiting the daily consumption of espressos, or 
increasing the time spent exercising. Often we pay for self-control, for 
instance simultaneously putting money in a savings account and 
maintaining debt on credit cards. The Econs of the rational-agent model 
do not resort to mental accounting: they have a comprehensive view of 
outcomes and are driven by external incentives. For Humans, mental 
accounts are a form of narrow framing; they keep things under control and 
manageable by a finite mind. 

Mental accounts are used extensively to keep score. Recall that 
professional golfers putt more successfully when working to avoid a bogey 
than to achieve a birdie. One conclusion we can draw is that the best 
golfers create a separate account for each hole; they do not only maintain 



a single account for their overall success. An ironic example that Thaler 
related in an early article remains one of the best illustrations of how 
mental accounting affects behavior: 

Two avid sports fans plan to travel 40 miles to see a basketball 
game. One of them paid for his ticket; the other was on his way to 
purchase a ticket when he got one free from a friend. A blizzard is 
announced for the night of the game. Which of the two ticket 
holders is more likely to brave the blizzard to see the game? 

The answer is immediate: we know that the fan who paid for his ticket is 
more likely to drive. Mental accounting provides the explanation. We 
assume that both fans set up an account for the game they hoped to see. 
Missing the game will close the accounts with a negative balance. 
Regardless of how they came by their ticket, both will be disappointed— 
but the closing balance is distinctly more negative for the one who bought a 
ticket and is now out of pocket as well as deprived of the game. Because 
staying home is worse for this individual, he is more motivated to see the 
game and therefore more likely to make the attempt to drive into a blizzard. 
These are tacit calculations of emotional balance, of the kind that System 1 
performs without deliberation. The emotions that people attach to the state 
of their mental accounts are not acknowledged in standard economic 
theory. An Econ would realize that the ticket has already been paid for and 
cannot be returned. Its cost is “sunk” and the Econ would not care whether 
he had bought the ticket to the game or got it from a friend (if Eco B 
Th5motketns have friends). To implement this rational behavior, System 2 
would have to be aware of the counterfactual possibility: “Would I still drive 
into this snowstorm if I had gotten the ticket free from a friend?” It takes an 
active and disciplined mind to raise such a difficult question. 

A related mistake afflicts individual investors when they sell stocks from 
their portfolio: 

You need money to cover the costs of your daughter’s wedding 
and will have to sell some stock. You remember the price at 
which you bought each stock and can identify it as a “winner,” 
currently worth more than you paid for it, or as a loser. Among the 
stocks you own, Blueberry Tiles is a winner; if you sell it today you 
will have achieved a gain of $5,000. You hold an equal 
investment in Tiffany Motors, which is currently worth $5,000 less 
than you paid for it. The value of both stocks has been stable in 
recent weeks. Which are you more likely to sell? 



A plausible way to formulate the choice is this: “I could close the Blueberry 
Tiles account and score a success for my record as an investor. 
Alternatively, I could close the Tiffany Motors account and add a failure to 
my record. Which would I rather do?” If the problem is framed as a choice 
between giving yourself pleasure and causing yourself pain, you will 
certainly sell Blueberry Tiles and enjoy your investment prowess. As might 
be expected, finance research has documented a massive preference for 
selling winners rather than losers—a bias that has been given an opaque 
label: the disposition effect. 

The disposition effect is an instance of narrowframing. The investor has 
set up an account for each share that she bought, and she wants to close 
every account as a gain. A rational agent would have a comprehensive 
view of the portfolio and sell the stock that is least likely to do well in the 
future, without considering whether it is a winner or a loser. Amos told me 
of a conversation with a financial adviser, who asked him for a complete 
list of the stocks in his portfolio, including the price at which each had been 
purchased. When Amos asked mildly, “Isn’t it supposed not to matter?” the 
adviser looked astonished. He had apparently always believed that the 
state of the mental account was a valid consideration. 

Amos’s guess about the financial adviser’s beliefs was probably right, 
but he was wrong to dismiss the buying price as irrelevant. The purchase 
price does matter and should be considered, even by Econs. The 
disposition effect is a costly bias because the question of whether to sell 
winners or losers has a clear answer, and it is not that it makes no 
difference. If you care about your wealth rather than your immediate 
emotions, you will sell the loser Tiffany Motors and hang on to the winning 
Blueberry Tiles. At least in the United States, taxes provide a strong 
incentive: realizing losses reduces your taxes, while selling winners 
exposes you to taxes. This elementary fact of financial life is actually known 
to all American investors, and it determines the decisions they make 
during one month of the year—investors sell more losers in December, 
when taxes are on their mind. The tax advantage is available all year, of 
course, but for 11 months of the year mental accounting prevails over 
financial common sense. Another argument against selling winners is the 
well-documented market anomaly that stocks that recently gained in value 
are likely to go on gaining at least for a short while. The net effect is large: 
the expected after-tax extra return of selling Tiffany rather than Blueberry is 
3.4% over the next year. Cl B Th5inge liosing a mental account with a gain 
is a pleasure, but it is a pleasure you pay for. The mistake is not one that 
an Econ would ever make, and experienced investors, who are using their 
System 2, are less susceptible to it than are novices. 



A rational decision maker is interested only in the future consequences 
of current investments. Justifying earlier mistakes is not among the Econ’s 
concerns. The decision to invest additional resources in a losing account, 
when better investments are available, is known as the sunk-cost fallacy, a 
costly mistake that is observed in decisions large and small. Driving into 
the blizzard because one paid for tickets is a sunk-cost error. 

Imagine a company that has already spent $50 million on a project. The 
project is now behind schedule and the forecasts of its ultimate returns are 
less favorable than at the initial planning stage. An additional investment of 
$60 million is required to give the project a chance. An alternative proposal 
is to invest the same amount in a new project that currently looks likely to 
bring higher returns. What will the company do? All too often a company 
afflicted by sunk costs drives into the blizzard, throwing good money after 
bad rather than accepting the humiliation of closing the account of a costly 
failure. This situation is in the top-right cell of the fourfold pattern , where the 
choice is between a sure loss and an unfavorable gamble, which is often 
unwisely preferred. 

The escalation of commitment to failing endeavors is a mistake from the 
perspective of the firm but not necessarily from the perspective of the 
executive who “owns” a floundering project. Canceling the project will leave 
a permanent stain on the executive's record, and his personal interests are 
perhaps best served by gambling further with the organization’s resources 
in the hope of recouping the original investment—or at least in an attempt 
to postpone the day of reckoning. In the presence of sunk costs, the 
manager’s incentives are misaligned with the objectives of the firm and its 
shareholders, a familiar type of what is known as the agency problem. 
Boards of directors are well aware of these conflicts and often replace a 
CEO who is encumbered by prior decisions and reluctant to cut losses. 
The members of the board do not necessarily believe that the new CEO is 
more competent than the one she replaces. They do know that she does 
not carry the same mental accounts and is therefore better able to ignore 
the sunk costs of past investments in evaluating current opportunities. 

The sunk-cost fallacy keeps people for too long in poor jobs, unhappy 
marriages, and unpromising research projects. I have often observed 
young scientists struggling to salvage a doomed project when they would 
be better advised to drop it and start a new one. Fortunately, research 
suggests that at least in some contexts the fallacy can be overcome. The 
sunk-cost fallacy is identified and taught as a mistake in both economics 
and business courses, apparently to good effect: there is evidence that 
graduate students in these fields are more willing than others to walk away 
from a failing project. 



Regret 


Regret is an emotion, and it is also a punishment that we administer to 
ourselves. The fear of regret is a factor in many of the decisions that 
people make (“Don’t do this, you will regret it” is a common warning), and 
the actual experience of regret is familiar. The emotional state has been 
well described by two Dutch psychologists, who noted that regret is 
“accompanied by feelings that one should have known better, by a B 
Th5="4ncesinking feeling, by thoughts about the mistake one has made 
and the opportunities lost, by a tendency to kick oneself and to correct 
one’s mistake, and by wanting to undo the event and to get a second 
chance.” Intense regret is what you experience when you can most easily 
imagine yourself doing something other than what you did. 

Regret is one of the counterfactual emotions that are triggered by the 
availability of alternatives to reality. After every plane crash there are 
special stories about passengers who “should not” have been on the plane 
—they got a seat at the last moment, they were transferred from another 
airline, they were supposed to fly a day earlier but had had to postpone. 
The common feature of these poignant stories is that they involve unusual 
events—and unusual events are easier than normal events to undo in 
imagination. Associative memory contains a representation of the normal 
world and its rules. An abnormal event attracts attention, and it also 
activates the idea of the event that would have been normal under the 
same circumstances. 

To appreciate the link of regret to normality, consider the following 
scenario: 


Mr. Brown almost never picks up hitchhikers. Yesterday he gave 
a man a ride and was robbed. 


Mr. Smith frequently picks up hitchhikers. Yesterday he gave a 
man a ride and was robbed. 


Who of the two will experience greater regret over the episode? 

The results are not surprising: 88% of respondents said Mr. Brown, 12% 
said Mr. Smith. 

Regret is not the same as blame. Other participants were asked this 
question about the same incident: 



Who will be criticized most severely by others? 


The results: Mr. Brown 23%, Mr. Smith 77%. 

Regret and blame are both evoked by a comparison to a norm, but the 
relevant norms are different. The emotions experienced by Mr. Brown and 
Mr. Smith are dominated by what they usually do about hitchhikers. Taking 
a hitchhiker is an abnormal event for Mr. Brown, and most people therefore 
expect him to experience more intense regret. A judgmental observer, 
however, will compare both men to conventional norms of reasonable 
behavior and is likely to blame Mr. Smith for habitually taking unreasonable 
risks. We are tempted to say that Mr. Smith deserved his fate and that Mr. 
Brown was unlucky. But Mr. Brown is the one who is more likely to be 
kicking himself, because he acted out of character in this one instance. 

Decision makers know that they are prone to regret, and the anticipation 
of that painful emotion plays a part in many decisions. Intuitions about 
regret are remarkably uniform and compelling, as the next example 
illustrates. 

Paul owns shares in company A. During the past year he 
considered switching to stock in company B, but he decided 
against it. He now learns that he would have been better off by 
$1,200 if he had switched to the stock of company B. 


George owned shares in company B. During the past year he sw 
B Th5 ne 

Who feels greater regret? 

The results are clear-cut: 8% of respondents say Paul, 92% say George. 

This is curious, because the situations of the two investors are 
objectively identical. They both now own stock A and both would have been 
better off by the same amount if they owned stock B. The only difference is 
that George got to where he is by acting, whereas Paul got to the same 
place by failing to act. This short example illustrates a broad story: people 
expect to have stronger emotional reactions (including regret) to an 
outcome that is produced by action than to the same outcome when it is 
produced by inaction. This has been verified in the context of gambling: 
people expect to be happier if they gamble and win than if they refrain from 
gambling and get the same amount. The asymmetry is at least as strong 
for losses, and it applies to blame as well as to regret. The key is not the 
difference between commission and omission but the distinction between 
default options and actions that deviate from the default. When you deviate 



from the default, you can easily imagine the norm—and if the default is 
associated with bad consequences, the discrepancy between the two can 
be the source of painful emotions. The default option when you own a stock 
is not to sell it, but the default option when you meet your colleague in the 
morning is to greet him. Selling a stock and failing to greet your coworker 
are both departures from the default option and natural candidates for 
regret or blame. 

In a compelling demonstration of the power of default options, 
participants played a computer simulation of blackjack. Some players 
were asked “Do you wish to hit?” while others were asked “Do you wish to 
stand?” Regardless of the question, saying yes was associated with much 
more regret than saying no if the outcome was bad! The question evidently 
suggests a default response, which is, “I don’t have a strong wish to do it.” 
It is the departure from the default that produces regret. Another situation in 
which action is the default is that of a coach whose team lost badly in their 
last game. The coach is expected to make a change of personnel or 
strategy, and a failure to do so will produce blame and regret. 

The asymmetry in the risk of regret favors conventional and risk-averse 
choices. The bias appears in many contexts. Consumers who are 
reminded that they may feel regret as a result of their choices show an 
increased preference for conventional options, favoring brand names over 
generics. The behavior of the managers of financial funds as the year 
approaches its end also shows an effect of anticipated evaluation: they 
tend to clean up their portfolios of unconventional and otherwise 
questionable stocks. Even life-or-death decisions can be affected. Imagine 
a physician with a gravely ill patient. One treatment fits the normal standard 
of care; another is unusual. The physician has some reason to believe that 
the unconventional treatment improves the patient’s chances, but the 
evidence is inconclusive. The physician who prescribes the unusual 
treatment faces a substantial risk of regret, blame, and perhaps litigation. 
In hindsight, it will be easier to imagine the normal choice; the abnormal 
choice will be easy to undo. True, a good outcome will contribute to the 
reputation of the physician who dared, but the potential benefit is smaller 
than the potential cost because success is generally a more normal 
outcome than is failure. 

Responsib B Th5onche potenility 

Losses are weighted about twice as much as gains in several contexts: 
choice between gambles, the endowment effect, and reactions to price 
changes. The loss-aversion coefficient is much higher in some situations. 



In particular, you may be more loss averse for aspects of your life that are 
more important than money, such as health. Furthermore, your reluctance 
to “sell” important endowments increases dramatically when doing so 
might make you responsible for an awful outcome. Richard Thaler’s early 
classic on consumer behavior included a compelling example, slightly 
modified in the following question: 

You have been exposed to a disease which if contracted leads to 
a quick and painless death within a week. The probability that you 
have the disease is 1/1,000. There is a vaccine that is effective 
only before any symptoms appear. What is the maximum you 
would be willing to pay for the vaccine? 

Most people are willing to pay a significant but limited amount. Facing the 
possibility of death is unpleasant, but the risk is small and it seems 
unreasonable to ruin yourself to avoid it. Now consider a slight variation: 

Volunteers are needed for research on the above disease. All 
that is required is that you expose yourself to a 1/1,000 chance of 
contracting the disease. What is the minimum you would ask to 
be paid in order to volunteer for this program? (\bu would not be 
allowed to purchase the vaccine.) 

As you might expect, the fee that volunteers set is far higher than the price 
they were willing to pay for the vaccine. Thaler reported informally that a 
typical ratio is about 50:1. The extremely high selling price reflects two 
features of this problem. In the first place, you are not supposed to sell your 
health; the transaction is not considered legitimate and the reluctance to 
engage in it is expressed in a higher price. Perhaps most important, you 
will be responsible for the outcome if it is bad. You know that if you wake 
up one morning with symptoms indicating that you will soon be dead, you 
will feel more regret in the second case than in the first, because you could 
have rejected the idea of selling your health without even stopping to 
consider the price. You could have stayed with the default option and done 
nothing, and now this counterfactual will haunt you for the rest of your life. 

The survey of parents’ reactions to a potentially hazardous insecticide 
mentioned earlier also included a question about the willingness to accept 
increased risk. The respondents were told to imagine that they used an 
insecticide where the risk of inhalation and child poisoning was 15 per 
10,000 bottles. A less expensive insecticide was available, for which the 
risk rose from 15 to 16 per 10,000 bottles. The parents were asked for the 
discount that would induce them to switch to the less expensive (and less 



safe) product. More than two-thirds of the parents in the survey responded 
that they would not purchase the new product at any price! They were 
evidently revolted by the very idea of trading the safety of their child for 
money. The minority who found a discount they could accept demanded an 
amount that was significantly higher than the amount they were willing to 
pay for a far larger improvement in the safety of the product. 

Anyone can understand and sympathize with the reluctance of parents to 
trade even a minute increase of risk to their child for money. It is worth 
noting, however, that this attitude is incoherent and potentially damaging to 
the safety of t B Th5ry tance ofhose we wish to protect. Even the most 
loving parents have finite resources of time and money to protect their child 
(the keeping-my-chiId-safe mental account has a limited budget), and it 
seems reasonable to deploy these resources in a way that puts them to 
best use. Money that could be saved by accepting a minute increase in the 
risk of harm from a pesticide could certainly be put to better use in 
reducing the child’s exposure to other harms, perhaps by purchasing a 
safer car seat or covers for electric sockets. The taboo tradeoff against 
accepting any increase in risk is not an efficient way to use the safety 
budget. In fact, the resistance may be motivated by a selfish fear of regret 
more than by a wish to optimize the child’s safety. The what-if? thought that 
occurs to any parent who deliberately makes such a trade is an image of 
the regret and shame he or she would feel in the event the pesticide 
caused harm. 

The intense aversion to trading increased risk for some other advantage 
plays out on a grand scale in the laws and regulations governing risk. This 
trend is especially strong in Europe, where the precautionary principle, 
which prohibits any action that might cause harm, is a widely accepted 
doctrine. In the regulatory context, the precautionary principle imposes the 
entire burden of proving safety on anyone who undertakes actions that 
might harm people or the environment. Multiple international bodies have 
specified that the absence of scientific evidence of potential damage is 
not sufficient justification for taking risks. As the jurist Cass Sunstein points 
out, the precautionary principle is costly, and when interpreted strictly it can 
be paralyzing. He mentions an impressive list of innovations that would not 
have passed the test, including “airplanes, air conditioning, antibiotics, 
automobiles, chlorine, the measles vaccine, open-heart surgery, radio, 
refrigeration, smallpox vaccine, and X-rays.” The strong version of the 
precautionary principle is obviously untenable. But enhanced loss 
aversion is embedded in a strong and widely shared moral intuition; it 
originates in System 1. The dilemma between intensely loss-averse moral 
attitudes and efficient risk management does not have a simple and 



compelling solution. 


We spend much of our day anticipating, and trying to avoid, the emotional 
pains we inflict on ourselves. How seriously should we take these 
intangible outcomes, the self-administered punishments (and occasional 
rewards) that we experience as we score our lives? Econs are not 
supposed to have them, and they are costly to Humans. They lead to 
actions that are detrimental to the wealth of individuals, to the soundness of 
policy, and to the welfare of society. But the emotions of regret and moral 
responsibility are real, and the fact that Econs do not have them may not 
be relevant. 

Is it reasonable, in particular, to let your choices be influenced by the 
anticipation of regret? Susceptibility to regret, like susceptibility to fainting 
spells, is a fact of life to which one must adjust. If you are an investor, 
sufficiently rich and cautious at heart, you may be able to afford the luxury 
of a portfolio that minimizes the expectation of regret even if it does not 
maximize the accrual of wealth. 

\bu can also take precautions that will inoculate you against regret. 
Perhaps the most useful is to be explicit about the anticipation of regret. If 
you can remember when things go badly that you considered the 
possibility of regret carefully before deciding, you are likely to experience 
less of it. You should also know that regret and hindsight bias will come 
together, so anything you can do to preclude hindsight is likely to be 
helpful. My personal hindsight-avoiding B Th5he ything policy is to be 
either very thorough or completely casual when making a decision with 
long-term consequences. Hindsight is worse when you think a little, just 
enough to tell yourself later, “I almost made a better choice.” 

Daniel Gilbert and his colleagues provocativel
y claim that people 
generally anticipate more regret than they will actually experience, because 
they underestimate the efficacy of the psychological defenses they will 
deploy—which they label the “psychological immune system.” Their 
recommendation is that you should not put too much weight on regret; even 
if you have some, it will hurt less than you now think. 

Speaking of Keeping Score 


“He has separate mental accounts for cash and credit purchases. 
I constantly remind him that money is money.” 



“We are hanging on to that stock just to avoid closing our mental 
account at a loss. It’s the disposition effect.” 


“We discovered an excellent dish at that restaurant and we never 
try anything else, to avoid regret.” 


“The salesperson showed me the most expensive car seat and 
said it was the safest, and I could not bring myself to buy the 
cheaper model. It felt like a taboo tradeoff.” 



Reversals 


You have the task of setting compensation for victims of violent 
crimes. \bu consider the case of a man who lost the use of his 
right arm as a result of a gunshot wound. He was shot when he 
walked in on a robbery occurring in a convenience store in his 
neighborhood. 


Two stores were located near the victim’s home, one of which he 
frequented more regularly than the other. Consider two scenarios: 


(i) The burglary happened in the man’s regular store. 

(ii) The man’s regular store was closed for a funeral, so he did his 
shopping in the other store, where he was shot. 


Should the store in which the man was shot make a difference to 
his compensation? 

You made your judgment in joint evaluation, where you consider two 
scenarios at the same time and make a comparison. \bu can apply a rule. 
If you think that the second scenario deserves higher compensation, you 
should assign it a higher dollar value. 

There is almost universal agreement on the answer: compensation 
should be the same in both situations. The compensation is for the 
crippling injury, so why should the location in which it occurred make any 
diff Cmakerence? The joint evaluation of the two scenarios gave you a 
chance to examine your moral principles about the factors that are relevant 
to victim compensation. For most people, location is not one of these 
factors. As in other situations that require an explicit comparison, thinking 
was slow and System 2 was involved. 

The psychologists Dale Miller and Cathy McFarland, who originally 
designed the two scenarios, presented them to different people for single 
evaluation. In their between-subjects experiment, each participant saw only 
one scenario and assigned a dollar value to it. They found, as you surely 
guessed, that the victim was awarded a much larger sum if he was shot in 
a store he rarely visited than if he was shot in his regular store. Poignancy 
(a close cousin of regret) is a counterfactual feeling, which is evoked 
because the thought “if only he had shopped at his regular store...” comes 



readily to mind. The familiar System 1 mechanisms of substitution and 
intensity matching translate the strength of the emotional reaction to the 
story onto a monetary scale, creating a large difference in dollar awards. 

The comparison of the two experiments reveals a sharp contrast. Almost 
everyone who sees both scenarios together (within-subject) endorses the 
principle that poignancy is not a legitimate consideration. Unfortunately, the 
principle becomes relevant only when the two scenarios are seen together, 
and this is not how life usually works. We normally experience life in the 
between-subjects mode, in which contrasting alternatives that might 
change your mind are absent, and of course WYSIATI. As a consequence, 
the beliefs that you endorse when you reflect about morality do not 
necessarily govern your emotional reactions, and the moral intuitions that 
come to your mind in different situations are not internally consistent. 

The discrepancy between single and joint evaluation of the burglary 
scenario belongs to a broad family of reversals of judgment and choice. 
The first preference reversals were discovered in the early 1970s, and 
many reversals of other kinds were reported over the years. 

Challenging Economics 

Preference reversals have an important place in the history of the 
conversation between psychologists and economists. The reversals that 
attracted attention were reported by Sarah Lichtenstein and Paul Slovic, 
two psychologists who had done their graduate work at the University of 
Michigan at the same time as Amos. They conducted an experiment on 
preferences between bets, which I show in a slightly simplified version. 

You are offered a choice between two bets, which are to be 
played on a roulette wheel with 36 sectors. 

Bet A: 11/36 to win $160, 25/36 to lose $15 
Bet B: 35/36 to win $40,1/36 to lose $10 

You are asked to choose between a safe bet and a riskier one: an almost 
certain win of a modest amount, or a small chance to win a substantially 
larger amount and a high probability of losing. Safety prevails, and B is 
clearly the more popular choice. 

Now consider each bet separately: If you owned that bet, what is the 
lowest price at which you would sell it? Remember that you are not 
negotiating with anyone—your task is to determine the lowest price at 
which you would truly be willing to give up the bet. Try it. You may find that 
the prize that can be won is Bmaktweare notsalient in this task, and that 
your evaluation of what the bet is worth is anchored on that value. The 



results support this conjecture, and the selling price is higher for bet A than 
for bet B. This is a preference reversal: people choose B over A, but if they 
imagine owning only one of them, they set a higher value on A than on B. 
As in the burglary scenarios, the preference reversal occurs because joint 
evaluation focuses attention on an aspect of the situation—the fact that bet 
A is much less safe than bet B—which was less salient in single 
evaluation. The features that caused the difference between the judgments 
of the options in single evaluation—the poignancy of the victim being in the 
wrong grocery store and the anchoring on the prize—are suppressed or 
irrelevant when the options are evaluated jointly. The emotional reactions 
of System 1 are much more likely to determine single evaluation; the 
comparison that occurs in joint evaluation always involves a more careful 
and effortful assessment, which calls for System 2. 

The preference reversal can be confirmed in a within-subject 

experiment, in which subjects set prices on both sets as part of a long list, 

and also choose between them. Participants are unaware of the 

inconsistency, and their reactions when confronted with it can be 

entertaining. A 1968 interview of a participant in the experiment, 
conducted by Sarah Lichtenstein, is an enduring classic of the field. The 
experimenter talks at length with a bewildered participant, who chooses 
one bet over another but is then willing to pay money to exchange the item 
he just chose for the one he just rejected, and goes through the cycle 
repeatedly. 

Rational Econs would surely not be susceptible to preference reversals, 
and the phenomenon was therefore a challenge to the rational-agent 
model and to the economic theory that is built on this model. The challenge 
could have been ignored, but it was not. A few years after the preference 
reversals were reported, two respected economists, David Grether and 
Charles Plott, published an article in the prestigious American Economic 
Review, in which they reported their own studies of the phenomenon that 
Lichtenstein and Slovic had described. This was probably the first finding 
by experimental psychologists that ever attracted the attention of 
economists. The introductory paragraph of Grether and Plott’s article was 
unusually dramatic for a scholarly paper, and their intent was clear: “A body 
of data and theory has been developing within psychology which should be 
of interest to economists. Taken at face value the data are simply 
inconsistent with preference theory and have broad implications about 
research priorities within economics.... This paper reports the results of a 
series of experiments designed to discredit the psychologists’ works as 
applied to economics.” 

Grether and Plott listed thirteen theories that could explain the original 



findings and reported carefully designed experiments that tested these 
theories. One of their hypotheses, which—needless to say—psychologists 
found patronizing, was that the results were due to the experiment being 
carried out by psychologists! Eventually, only one hypothesis was left 
standing: the psychologists were right. Grether and Plott acknowledged 
that this hypothesis is the least satisfactory from the point of view of 
standard preference theory, because “it allows individual choice to depend 
on the context in which the choices are made”—a clear violation of the 
coherence doctrine. 

\bu might think that this surprising outcome would cause much 
anguished soul-searching among economists, as a basic assumption of 
their theory had been successfully challenged. But this is not the way things 
work in social science, including both psychol Bmak/p&gt;ished soogy and 
economics. Theoretical beliefs are robust, and it takes much more than 
one embarrassing finding for established theories to be seriously 
questioned. In fact, Grether and Plott’s admirably forthright report had little 
direct effect on the convictions of economists, probably including Grether 
and Plott. It contributed, however, to a greater willingness of the community 
of economists to take psychological research seriously and thereby greatly 
advanced the conversation across the boundaries of the disciplines. 

Categories 

“How tall is John?” If John is 5' tall, your answer will depend on his age; he 
is very tall if he is 6 years old, very short if he is 16. Your System 1 
automatically retrieves the relevant norm, and the meaning of the scale of 
tallness is adjusted automatically. You are also able to match intensities 
across categories and answer the question, “How expensive is a 
restaurant meal that matches John’s height?” Your answer will depend on 
John’s age: a much less expensive meal if he is 16 than if he is 6. 

But now look at this: 

John is 6. He is 5' tall. 

Jim is 16. He is 5'1" tall. 

In single evaluations, everyone will agree that John is very tall and Jim is 
not, because they are compared to different norms. If you are asked a 
directly comparative question, “Is John as tall as Jim?” you will answer that 
he is not. There is no surprise here and little ambiguity. In other situations, 
however, the process by which objects and events recruit their own context 
of comparison can lead to incoherent choices on serious matters. 

\bu should not form the impression that single and joint evaluations are 



always inconsistent, or that judgments are completely chaotic. Our world is 
broken into categories for which we have norms, such as six-year-old boys 
or tables. Judgments and preferences are coherent within categories but 
potentially incoherent when the objects that are evaluated belong to 
different categories. For an example, answer the following three questions: 

Which do you like more, apples or peaches? 

Which do you like more, steak or stew? 

Which do you like more, apples or steak? 

The first and the second questions refer to items that belong to the same 
category, and you know immediately which you like more. Furthermore, 
you would have recovered the same ranking from single evaluation (“How 
much do you like apples?” and “How much do you like peaches?”) 
because apples and peaches both evoke fruit. There will be no preference 
reversal because different fruits are compared to the same norm and 
implicitly compared to each other in single as well as in joint evaluation. In 
contrast to the within-category questions, there is no stable answer for the 
comparison of apples and steak. Unlike apples and peaches, apples and 
steak are not natural substitutes and they do not fill the same need. You 
sometimes want steak and sometimes an apple, but you rarely say that 
either one will do just as well as the other. 

Imagine receiving an e-mail from an organization that you generally trust, 
requesting a Bmak 

Dolphins in many breeding locations are threatened by pollution, 
which is expected to result in a decline of the dolphin population. 
A special fund supported by private contributions has been set up 
to provide pollution-free breeding locations for dolphins. 

What associations did this question evoke? Whether or not you were fully 
aware of them, ideas and memories of related causes came to your mind. 
Projects intended to preserve endangered species were especially likely 
to be recalled. Evaluation on the GOOD-BAD dimension is an automatic 
operation of System 1, and you formed a crude impression of the ranking 
of the dolphin among the species that came to mind. The dolphin is much 
more charming than, say, ferrets, snails, or carp—it has a highly favorable 
rank in the set of species to which it is spontaneously compared. 

The question you must answer is not whether you like dolphins more 
than carp; you have been asked to come up with a dollar value. Of course, 
you may know from the experience of previous solicitations that you never 
respond to requests of this kind. For a few minutes, imagine yourself as 



someone who does contribute to such appeals. 

Like many other difficult questions, the assessment of dollar value can 
be solved by substitution and intensity matching. The dollar question is 
difficult, but an easier question is readily available. Because you like 
dolphins, you will probably feel that saving them is a good cause. The next 
step, which is also automatic, generates a dollar number by translating the 
intensity of your liking of dolphins onto a scale of contributions. You have a 
sense of your scale of previous contributions to environmental causes, 
which may differ from the scale of your contributions to politics or to the 
football team of your alma mater. You know what amount would be a “very 
large” contribution for you and what amounts are “large,” “modest,” and 
“small.” You also have scales for your attitude to species (from “like very 
much” to “not at all”). You are therefore able to translate your attitude onto 
the dollar scale, moving automatically from “like a lot” to “fairly large 
contribution” and from there to a number of dollars. 

On another occasion, you are approached with a different appeal: 

Farmworkers, who are exposed to the sun for many hours, have a 
higher rate of skin cancer than the general population. Frequent 
medical check-ups can reduce the risk. A fund will be set up to 
support medical check-ups for threatened groups. 

Is this an urgent problem? Which category did it evoke as a norm when you 
assessed urgency? If you automatically categorized the problem as a 
public-health issue, you probably found that the threat of skin cancer in 
farmworkers does not rank very high among these issues—almost 
certainly lower than the rank of dolphins among endangered species. As 
you translated your impression of the relative importance of the skin cancer 
issue into a dollar amount, you might well have come up with a smaller 
contribution than you offered to protect an endearing animal. In 
experiments, the dolphins attracted somewhat larger contributions in single 
evaluation than did the farmworkers. 

Next, consider the two causes in joint evaluation. Which of the two, 
dolphins or farmworkers, deserves a larger dollar contribution? Joint 
evaluation highlights a feature that was not noticeable in si Bmakecksider 
the ngle evaluation but is recognized as decisive when detected: farmers 
are human, dolphins are not. You knew that, of course, but it was not 
relevant to the judgment that you made in single evaluation. The fact that 
dolphins are not human did not arise because all the issues that were 
activated in your memory shared that feature. The fact that farmworkers 
are human did not come to mind because all public-health issues involve 
humans. The narrow framing of single evaluation allowed dolphins to have 



a higher intensity score, leading to a high rate of contributions by intensity 
matching. Joint evaluation changes the representation of the issues: the 
“human vs. animal” feature becomes salient only when the two are seen 
together. In joint evaluation people show a solid preference for the 
farmworkers and a willingness to contribute substantially more to their 
welfare than to the protection of a likable non-human species. Here again, 
as in the cases of the bets and the burglary shooting, the judgments made 
in single and in joint evaluation will not be consistent. 

Christopher Hsee, of the University of Chicago, has contributed the 
following example of preference reversal, among many others of the same 
type. The objects to be evaluated are secondhand music dictionaries. 

Dictionary A Dictionary B 
Year of publication 1993 1993 

Number of entries 10,000 20,000 

Condition Like new Cover torn, otherwise like new 

When the dictionaries are presented in single evaluation, dictionary A is 
valued more highly, but of course the preference changes in joint 
evaluation. The result illustrates Hsee’s evalLiability hypothesis: The 
number of entries is given no weight in single evaluation, because the 
numbers are not “evaluable” on their own. In joint evaluation, in contrast, it 
is immediately obvious that dictionary B is superior on this attribute, and it 
is also apparent that the number of entries is far more important than the 
condition of the cover. 


Unjust Reversals 

There is good reason to believe that the administration of justice is 
infected by predictable incoherence in several domains. The evidence is 
drawn in part from experiments, including studies of mock juries, and in 
part from observation of patterns in legislation, regulation, and litigation. 

In one experiment, mock jurors recruited from jury rolls in Texas were 
asked to assess punitive damages in several civil cases. The cases came 
in pairs, each consisting of one claim for physical injury and one for 
financial loss. The mock jurors first assessed one of the scenarios and 
then they were shown the case with which it was Bmak in, eac paired and 
were asked to compare the two. The following are summaries of one pair 
of cases: 


Case 1: A child suffered moderate burns when his pajamas 



caught fire as he was playing with matches. The firm that 
produced the pajamas had not made them adequately fire 
resistant. 


Case 2: The unscrupulous dealings of a bank caused another 
bank a loss of $10 million. 

Half of the participants judged case 1 first (in single evaluation) before 
comparing the two cases in joint evaluation. The sequence was reversed 
for the other participants. In single evaluation, the jurors awarded higher 
punitive damages to the defrauded bank than to the burned child, 
presumably because the size of the financial loss provided a high anchor. 

When the cases were considered together, however, sympathy for the 
individual victim prevailed over the anchoring effect and the jurors 
increased the award to the child to surpass the award to the bank. 
Averaging over several such pairs of cases, awards to victims of personal 
injury were more than twice as large in joint than in single evaluation. The 
jurors who saw the case of the burned child on its own made an offer that 
matched the intensity of their feelings. They could not anticipate that the 
award to the child would appear inadequate in the context of a large award 
to a financial institution. In joint evaluation, the punitive award to the bank 
remained anchored on the loss it had sustained, but the award to the 
burned child increased, reflecting the outrage evoked by negligence that 
causes injury to a child. 

As we have seen, rationality is generally served by broader and more 
comprehensive frames, and joint evaluation is obviously broader than 
single evaluation. Of course, you should be wary of joint evaluation when 
someone who controls what you see has a vested interest in what you 
choose. Salespeople quickly learn that manipulation of the context in which 
customers see a good can profoundly influence preferences. Except for 
such cases of deliberate manipulation, there is a presumption that the 
comparative judgment, which necessarily involves System 2, is more likely 
to be stable than single evaluations, which often reflect the intensity of 
emotional responses of System 1. We would expect that any institution that 
wishes to elicit thoughtful judgments would seek to provide the judges with 
a broad context for the assessments of individual cases. I was surprised to 
learn from Cass Sunstein that jurors who are to assess punitive damages 
are explicitly prohibited from considering other cases. The legal system, 
contrary to psychological common sense, favors single evaluation. 

In another study of incoherence in the legal system, Sunstein compared 
the administrative punishments that can be imposed by different U.S. 



government agencies including the Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration and the Environmental Protection Agency. He concluded 
that “within categories, penalties seem extremely sensible, at least in the 
sense that the more serious harms are punished more severely. For 
occupational safety and health violations, the largest penalties are for 
repeated violations, the next largest for violations that are both willful and 
serious, and the least serious for failures to engage in the requisite record¬ 
keeping.” It should not surprise you, however, that the size of penalties 
varied greatly across agencies, in a manner that reflected politics and 
history more than any global concern for fairness. The fine for a “serious 
violation” of the regulations concerning worker safety is capped at $7,000, 
while a vi Bmaknseflected polation of the Wild Bird Conservation Act can 
result in a fine of up to $25,000. The fines are sensible in the context of 
other penalties set by each agency, but they appear odd when compared 
to each other. As in the other examples in this chapter, you can see the 
absurdity only when the two cases are viewed together in a broad frame. 
The system of administrative penalties is coherent within agencies but 
incoherent globally. 


Speaking of Reversals 


“The BTU units meant nothing to me until I saw how much air- 
conditioning units vary. Joint evaluation was essential.” 


“You say this was an outstanding speech because you compared 
it to her other speeches. Compared to others, she was still 
inferior.” 


“It is often the case that when you broaden the frame, you reach 
more reasonable decisions.” 


“When you see cases in isolation, you are likely to be guided by 
an emotional reaction of System 1.” 



Frames and Reality 


Italy and France competed in the 2006 final of the World Cup. The next two 
sentences both describe the outcome: “Italy won.” “France lost.” Do those 
statements have the same meaning? The answer depends entirely on what 
you mean by meaning. 

For the purpose of logical reasoning, the two descriptions of the 
outcome of the match are interchangeable because they designate the 
same state of the world. As philosophers say, their truth conditions are 
identical: if one of these sentences is true, then the other is true as well. 
This is how Econs understand things. Their beliefs and preferences are 
reality-bound. In particular, the objects of their choices are states of the 
world, which are not affected by the words chosen to describe them. 

There is another sense of meaning, in which “Italy won” and “France 
lost” do not have the same meaning at all. In this sense, the meaning of a 
sentence is what happens in your associative machinery while you 
understand it. The two sentences evoke markedly different associations. 
“Italy won” evokes thoughts of the Italian team and what it did to win. 
“France lost” evokes thoughts of the French team and what it did that 
caused it to lose, including the memorable head butt of an Italian player by 
the French star Zidane. In terms of the associations they bring to mind— 
how System 1 reacts to them—the two sentences really “mean” different 
things. The fact that logically equivalent statements evoke different 
reactions makes it impossible for Humans to be as reliably rational as 
Econs. 


Emotional Framing 

Amos and I applied the label of framing effects to the unjustified influences 
of formulation on beliefs an Con d preferences. This is one of the 
examples we used: 

Would you accept a gamble that offers a 10% chance to win $95 
and a 90% chance to lose $5? 


Would you pay $5 to participate in a lottery that offers a 10% 
chance to win $100 and a 90% chance to win nothing? 

First, take a moment to convince yourself that the two problems are 
identical. In both of them you must decide whether to accept an uncertain 



prospect that will leave you either richer by $95 or poorer by $5. Someone 
whose preferences are reality-bound would give the same answer to both 
questions, but such individuals are rare. In fact, one version attracts many 
more positive answers: the second. A bad outcome is much more 
acceptable if it is framed as the cost of a lottery ticket that did not win than 
if it is simply described as losing a gamble. We should not be surprised: 
losses evokes stronger negative feelings than costs. Choices are not 
reality-bound because System 1 is not reality-bound. 

The problem we constructed was influenced by what we had learned 
from Richard Thaler, who told us that when he was a graduate student he 
had pinned on his board a card that said costs are not losses. In his early 
essay on consumer behavior, Thaler described the debate about whether 
gas stations would be allowed to charge different prices for purchases 
paid with cash or on credit. The credit-card lobby pushed hard to make 
differential pricing illegal, but it had a fallback position: the difference, if 
allowed, would be labeled a cash discount, not a credit surcharge. Their 
psychology was sound: people will more readily forgo a discount than pay 
a surcharge. The two may be economically equivalent, but they are not 
emotionally equivalent. 

In an elegant experiment, a team of neuroscientists at University College 
London combined a study of framing effects with recordings of activity in 
different areas of the brain. In order to provide reliable measures of the 
brain response, the experiment consisted of many trials. Figure 14 
illustrates the two stages of one of these trials. 

First, the subject is asked to imagine that she received an amount of 
money, in this example £50. 

The subject is then asked to choose between a sure outcome and a 
gamble on a wheel of chance. If the wheel stops on white she “receives” 
the entire amount; if it stops on black she gets nothing. The sure outcome 
is simply the expected value of the gamble, in this case a gain of £20. 






Figure 14 


As shown, the same sure outcome can be framed in two different ways: 
as KEEP £20 or as LOSE £30. The objective outcomes are precisely 
identical in the two frames, and a reality-bound Econ would respond to 
both in the same way—selecting either the sure thing or the gamble 
regardless of the frame—but we already know that the Human mind is not 
bound to reality. Tendencies to approach or avoid are evoked by the 
words, and we expect System 1 to be biased in favor of the sure option 
when it is designated as KEEP and against that same option when it is 
designated as LOSE. 

The experiment consisted of many trials, and each participant 
encountere Bon p&gt; 

The activity of the brain was recorded as the subjects made each 
decision. Later, the trials were separated into two categories: 

1 Trials on which the subject’s choice conformed to the 
frame 


• preferred the sure thing in the KEEP version 

• preferred the gamble in the LOSS version 

2 Trials in which the choice did not conform to the frame. 

The remarkable results illustrate the potential of the new discipline of 
neuroeconomics—the study of what a person’s brain does while he makes 
decisions. Neuroscientists have run thousands of such experiments, and 
they have learned to expect particular regions of the brain to “light up”— 
indicating increased flow of oxygen, which suggests heightened neural 
activity—depending on the nature of the task. Different regions are active 
when the individual attends to a visual object, imagines kicking a ball, 
recognizes a face, or thinks of a house. Other regions light up when the 
individual is emotionally aroused, is in conflict, or concentrates on solving a 
problem. Although neuroscientists carefully avoid the language of “this part 
of the brain does such and such...,” they have learned a great deal about 
the “personalities” of different brain regions, and the contribution of 
analyses of brain activity to psychological interpretation has greatly 
improved. The framing study yielded three main findings: 



• A region that is commonly associated with emotional arousal (the 
amygdala) was most likely to be active when subjects’ choices 
conformed to the frame. This is just as we would expect if the 
emotionally loaded words KEEP and LOSE produce an immediate 
tendency to approach the sure thing (when it is framed as a gain) or 
avoid it (when it is framed as a loss). The amygdala is accessed very 
rapidly by emotional stimuli—and it is a likely suspect for involvement 
in System 1. 

• A brain region known to be associated with conflict and self-control 
(the anterior cingulate) was more active when subjects did not do 
what comes naturally—when they chose the sure thing in spite of its 
being labeled LOSE. Resisting the inclination of System 1 
apparently involves conflict. 

• The most “rational” subjects—those who were the least susceptible 
to framing effects—showed enhanced activity in a frontal area of the 
brain that is implicated in combining emotion and reasoning to guide 
decisions. Remarkably, the “rational” individuals were not those who 
showed the strongest neural evidence of conflict. It appears that 
these elite participants were (often, not always) reality-bound with 
little conflict. 


By joining observations of actual choices with a mapping of neural 
activity, this study provides a good illustration of how the emotion evoked 
by a word can “leak” into the final choice. 

An experiment that Amos carried out with colleagues at Harvard Medical 
School is the classic example of emotional framing. Physician participants 
were given statistics about the outcomes of two treatments for lung cancer: 
surgery and radiation. The five-year survival rates clearly favor surgery, but 
in the short term surgery is riskier than radiation. Half the participants read 
statistics about survival rates, the others received the same information in 
terms of mortality rates. The two descriptions of the short-term outcomes of 
surgery were: 

The one-month survival rate is 90%. 

There is 10% mortality in the first month. 

You already know the results: surgery was much more popular in the former 
frame (84% of physicians chose it) than in the latter (where 50% favored 
radiation). The logical equivalence of the two descriptions is transparent, 
and a reality-bound decision maker would make the same choice 



regardless of which version she saw. But System 1, as we have gotten to 
know it, is rarely indifferent to emotional words: mortality is bad, survival is 
good, and 90% survival sounds encouraging whereas 10% mortality is 
frightening. An important finding of the study is that physicians were just as 
susceptible to the framing effect as medically unsophisticated people 
(hospital patients and graduate students in a business school). Medical 
training is, evidently, no defense against the power of framing. 

The KEEP-LOSE study and the survival-mortality experiment differed in 
one important respect. The participants in the brain-imaging study had 
many trials in which they encountered the different frames. They had an 
opportunity to recognize the distracting effects of the frames and to simplify 
their task by adopting a common frame, perhaps by translating the LOSE 
amount into its KEEP equivalent. It would take an intelligent person (and an 
alert System 2) to learn to do this, and the few participants who managed 
the feat were probably among the “rational” agents that the experimenters 
identified. In contrast, the physicians who read the statistics about the two 
therapies in the survival frame had no reason to suspect that they would 
have made a different choice if they had heard the same statistics framed 
in terms of mortality. Reframing is effortful and System 2 is normally lazy. 
Unless there is an obvious reason to do otherwise, most of us passively 
accept decision problems as they are framed and therefore rarely have an 
opportunity to discover the extent to which our preferences are frame- 
bound rather than reality-bound. 

Empty Intuitions 

Amos and I introduced our discussion of framing by an example that has 
become known as the “Asian disease problem”: 

Imagine that the United States is preparing for the outbreak of an 
unusual Asian disease, which is expected to kill 600 people. Two 
alternative programs to combat the disease have been 
proposed. Assume that the exact scientific estimates of the 
consequences of the programs are as follows: 


If program A is adopted, 200 people will be saved. 

If program B is adopted, there is a one-third probability 
that 600 people will be saved and a two-thirds 
probability that no people will be saved. 


A substantial majority of respondents choose program A: they prefer the 



certain option over the gamble. 

The outcomes of the programs are framed differently in a second 
version: 


If program A' is adopted, 400 people will die. 

If program B' is adopted, there is a one-third probability that 
nobody will die and a two-thirds probability that 600 people will 
die. 

Look closely and compare the two versions: the consequences of 
programs A and A' are identical; so are the consequences of programs B 
and B'. In the second frame, however, a large majority of people choose 
the gamble. 

The different choices in the two frames fit prospect theory, in which 
choices between gambles and sure things are resolved differently, 
depending on whether the outcomes are good or bad. Decision makers 
tend to prefer the sure thing over the gamble (they are risk averse) when 
the outcomes are good. They tend to reject the sure thing and accept the 
gamble (they are risk seeking) when both outcomes are negative. These 
conclusions were well established for choices about gambles and sure 
things in the domain of money. The disease problem shows that the same 
rule applies when the outcomes are measured in lives saved or lost. In this 
context, as well, the framing experiment reveals that risk-averse and risk¬ 
seeking preferences are not reality-bound. Preferences between the same 
objective outcomes reverse with different formulations. 

An experience that Amos shared with me adds a grim note to the story. 
Amos was invited to give a speech to a group of public-health 
professionals—the people who make decisions about vaccines and other 
programs. He took the opportunity to present them with the Asian disease 
problem: half saw the “lives-saved” version, the others answered the “lives- 
lost” question. Like other people, these professionals were susceptible to 
the framing effects. It is somewhat worrying that the officials who make 
decisions that affect everyone’s health can be swayed by such a 
superficial manipulation—but we must get used to the idea that even 
important decisions are influenced, if not governed, by System 1. 

Even more troubling is what happens when people are confronted with 
their inconsistency: “You chose to save 200 lives for sure in one 
formulation and you chose to gamble rather than accept 400 deaths in the 
other. Now that you know these choices were inconsistent, how do you 
decide?” The answer is usually embarrassed silence. The intuitions that 
determined the original choice came from System 1 and had no more 
moral basis than did the preference for keeping £20 or the aversion to 



losing £30. Saving lives with certainty is good, deaths are bad. Most 
people find that their System 2 has no moral intuitions of its own to answer 
the question. 

I am grateful to the great economist Thomas Schelling for my favorite 
example of a framing effect, which he described in his book Choice and 
Consequence. Schelling’s book was written before our work on framing 
was published, and framing was not his main concern. He reported on his 
experience teaching a class at the Kennedy School at Harvard, in which 
Bon he linthe topic was child exemptions in the tax code. Schelling told his 
students that a standard exemption is allowed for each child, and that the 
amount of the exemption is independent of the taxpayer’s income. He 
asked their opinion of the following proposition: 

Should the child exemption be larger for the rich than for the 
poor? 

Your own intuitions are very likely the same as those of Schelling’s 
students: they found the idea of favoring the rich by a larger exemption 
completely unacceptable. 

Schelling then pointed out that the tax law is arbitrary. It assumes a 
childless family as the default case and reduces the tax by the amount of 
the exemption for each child. The tax law could of course be rewritten with 
another default case: a family with two children. In this formulation, families 
with fewer than the default number of children would pay a surcharge. 
Schelling now asked his students to report their view of another 
proposition: 

Should the childless poor pay as large a surcharge as the 
childless rich? 

Here again you probably agree with the students’ reaction to this idea, 
which they rejected with as much vehemence as the first. But Schelling 
showed his class that they could not logically reject both proposals. Set the 
two formulations next to each other. The difference between the tax due by 
a childless family and by a family with two children is described as a 
reduction of tax in the first version and as an increase in the second. If in 
the first version you want the poor to receive the same (or greater) benefit 
as the rich for having children, then you must want the poor to pay at least 
the same penalty as the rich for being childless. 

We can recognize System 1 at work. It delivers an immediate response 
to any question about rich and poor: when in doubt, favor the poor. The 
surprising aspect of Schelling’s problem is that this apparently simple 



moral rule does not work reliably. It generates contradictory answers to the 
same problem, depending on how that problem is framed. And of course 
you already know the question that comes next. Now that you have seen 
that your reactions to the problem are influenced by the frame, what is your 
answer to the question: How should the tax code treat the children of the 
rich and the poor? 

Here again, you will probably find yourself dumbfounded. You have moral 
intuitions about differences between the rich and the poor, but these 
intuitions depend on an arbitrary reference point, and they are not about 
the real problem. This problem—the question about actual states of the 
world—is how much tax individual families should pay, how to fill the cells 
in the matrix of the tax code. \bu have no compelling moral intuitions to 
guide you in solving that problem. Your moral feelings are attached to 
frames, to descriptions of reality rather than to reality itself. The message 
about the nature of framing is stark: framing should not be viewed as an 
intervention that masks or distorts an underlying preference. At least in this 
instance—and also in the problems of the Asian disease and of surgery 
versus radiation for lung cancer—there is no underlying preference that is 
masked or distorted by the frame. Our preferences are about framed 
problems, and our moral intuitions are about descriptions, not about 
substance. 


Good Frames 

Not all frames are equal, and s Bon nd t="4%" wome frames are clearly 
better than alternative ways to describe (or to think about) the same thing. 
Consider the following pair of problems: 

A woman has bought two $80 tickets to the theater. When she 
arrives at the theater, she opens her wallet and discovers that the 
tickets are missing. Will she buy two more tickets to see the 
play? 


A woman goes to the theater, intending to buy two tickets that 
cost $80 each. She arrives at the theater, opens her wallet, and 
discovers to her dismay that the $160 with which she was going 
to make the purchase is missing. She could use her credit card. 
Will she buy the tickets? 


Respondents who see only one version of this problem reach different 
conclusions, depending on the frame. Most believe that the woman in the 



first story will go home without seeing the show if she has lost tickets, and 
most believe that she will charge tickets for the show if she has lost money. 

The explanation should already be familiar—this problem involves 
mental accounting and the sunk-cost fallacy. The different frames evoke 
different mental accounts, and the significance of the loss depends on the 
account to which it is posted. When tickets to a particular show are lost, it 
is natural to post them to the account associated with that play. The cost 
appears to have doubled and may now be more than the experience is 
worth. In contrast, a loss of cash is charged to a “general revenue” account 
—the theater patron is slightly poorer than she had thought she was, and 
the question she is likely to ask herself is whether the small reduction in her 
disposable wealth will change her decision about paying for tickets. Most 
respondents thought it would not. 

The version in which cash was lost leads to more reasonable decisions. 
It is a better frame because the loss, even if tickets were lost, is “sunk,” and 
sunk costs should be ignored. History is irrelevant and the only issue that 
matters is the set of options the theater patron has now, and their likely 
consequences. Whatever she lost, the relevant fact is that she is less 
wealthy than she was before she opened her wallet. If the person who lost 
tickets were to ask for my advice, this is what I would say: “Would you have 
bought tickets if you had lost the equivalent amount of cash? If yes, go 
ahead and buy new ones.” Broader frames and inclusive accounts 
generally lead to more rational decisions. 

In the next example, two alternative frames evoke different mathematical 
intuitions, and one is much superior to the other. In an article titled “The 
MPG Illusion,” which appeared in Science magazine in 2008, the 
psychologists Richard Larrick and Jack Soil identified a case in which 
passive acceptance of a misleading frame has substantial costs and 
serious policy consequences. Most car buyers list gas mileage as one of 
the factors that determine their choice; they know that high-mileage cars 
have lower operating costs. But the frame that has traditionally been used 
in the United States—miles per gallon—provides very poor guidance to 
the decisions of both individuals and policy makers. Consider two car 
owners who seek to reduce their costs: 

Adam switches from a gas-guzzler of 12 mpg to a slightly less 

voracious guzzler that runs at 14 mpg. 


The environmentally virtuous Beth switches from a Bon ss es from 
30 mpg car to one that runs at 40 mpg. 



Suppose both drivers travel equal distances over a year. Who will save 
more gas by switching? \bu almost certainly share the widespread 
intuition that Beth’s action is more significant than Adam’s: she reduced 
mpg by 10 miles rather than 2, and by a third (from 30 to 40) rather than a 
sixth (from 12 to 14). Now engage your System 2 and work it out. If the two 
car owners both drive 10,000 miles, Adam will reduce his consumption 
from a scandalous 833 gallons to a still shocking 714 gallons, for a saving 
of 119 gallons. Beth’s use of fuel will drop from 333 gallons to 250, saving 
only 83 gallons. The mpg frame is wrong, and it should be replaced by the 
gallons-per-mile frame (or liters-per-100 kilometers, which is used in most 
other countries). As Larrick and Soil point out, the misleading intuitions 
fostered by the mpg frame are likely to mislead policy makers as well as 
car buyers. 

Under President Obama, Cass Sunstein served as administrator of the 
Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs. With Richard Thaler, Sunstein 
coauthored Nudge, which is the basic manual for applying behavioral 
economics to policy. It was no accident that the “fuel economy and 
environment” sticker that will be displayed on every new car starting in 
2013 will for the first time in the United States include the gallons-per-mile 
information. Unfortunately, the correct formulation will be in small print, 
along with the more familiar mpg information in large print, but the move is 
in the right direction. The five-year interval between the publication of “The 
MPG Illusion” and the implementation of a partial correction is probably a 
speed record for a significant application of psychological science to 
public policy. 

A directive about organ donation in case of accidental death is noted on 
an individual’s driver license in many countries. The formulation of that 
directive is another case in which one frame is clearly superior to the other. 
Few people would argue that the decision of whether or not to donate 
one’s organs is unimportant, but there is strong evidence that most people 
make their choice thoughtlessly. The evidence comes from a comparison 
of the rate of organ donation in European countries, which reveals startling 
differences between neighboring and culturally similar countries. An article 
published in 2003 noted that the rate of organ donation was close to 100% 
in Austria but only 12% in Germany, 86% in Sweden but only 4% in 
Denmark. 

These enormous differences are a framing effect, which is caused by 
the format of the critical question. The high-donation countries have an opt 
out form, where individuals who wish not to donate must check an 
appropriate box. Unless they take this simple action, they are considered 
willing donors. The low-contribution countries have an opt-in form: you must 
check a box to become a donor. That is all. The best single predictor of 



whether or not people will donate their organs is the designation of the 
default option that will be adopted without having to check a box. 

Unlike other framing effects that have been traced to features of System 
1, the organ donation effect is best explained by the laziness of System 2. 
People will check the box if they have already decided what they wish to 
do. If they are unprepared for the question, they have to make the effort of 
thinking whether they want to check the box. I imagine an organ donation 
form in which people are required to solve a mathematical problem in the 
box that corresponds to their decision. One of the boxes contains the 
problem 2 + 2 = ? The problem in the other box is 13 x 37 = ? The rate of 
donations would surely be swayed. 

When the role of formulation is acknowledged, a policy question arises: 
Which formulation should be adopted? In this case, the answer is 
straightforward. If you believe that a large supply of donated organs is 
good for society, you will not be neutral between a formulation that yields 
almost 100% donations and another formulation that elicits donations from 
4% of drivers. 

As we have seen again and again, an important choice is controlled by 
an utterly inconsequential feature of the situation. This is embarrassing—it 
is not how we would wish to make important decisions. Furthermore, it is 
not how we experience the workings of our mind, but the evidence for 
these cognitive illusions is undeniable. 

Count that as a point against the rational-agent theory. A theory that is 
worthy of the name asserts that certain events are impossible—they will 
not happen if the theory is true. When an “impossible” event is observed, 
the theory is falsified. Theories can survive for a long time after conclusive 
evidence falsifies them, and the rational-agent model certainly survived the 
evidence we have seen, and much other evidence as well. 

The case of organ donation shows that the debate about human 
rationality can have a large effect in the real world. A significant difference 
between believers in the rational-agent model and the skeptics who 
question it is that the believers simply take it for granted that the 
formulation of a choice cannot determine preferences on significant 
problems. They will not even be interested in investigating the problem— 
and so we are often left with inferior outcomes. 

Skeptics about rationality are not surprised. They are trained to be 
sensitive to the power of inconsequential factors as determinants of 
preference—my hope is that readers of this book have acquired this 
sensitivity. 


Speaking of Frames and Reality 



“They will feel better about what happened if they manage to 
frame the outcome in terms of how much money they kept rather 
than how much they lost.” 


“Let’s reframe the problem by changing the reference point. 
Imagine we did not own it; how much would we think it is worth?” 


“Charge the loss to your mental account of ‘general revenue’— 
you will feel better!” 


“They ask you to check the box to opt out of their mailing list. 
Their list would shrink if they asked you to check a box to opt in!” 



Part 5 



Two Selves 



Two Selves 


The term utility has had two distinct meanings in its long history. Jeremy 
Bentham opened his Introduction to the Principles of Morals and 
Legislation with the famous sentence “Nature has placed mankind under 
the governance of two sovereign masters, pain and pleasure. It is for them 
alone to point out what we ought to do, as well as to determine what we 
shall do.” In an awkward footnote, Bentham apologized for applying the 
word utility to these experiences, saying that he had been unable to find a 
better word. To distinguish Bentham’s interpretation of the term, I will call it 
experienced utility. 

For the last 100 years, economists have used the same word to mean 
something else. As economists and decision theorists apply the term, it 
means “wantability”—and I have called it decision utility. Expected utility 
theory, for example, is entirely about the rules of rationality that should 
govern decision utilities; it has nothing at all to say about hedonic 
experiences. Of course, the two concepts of utility will coincide if people 
want what they will enjoy, and enjoy what they chose for themselves—and 
this assumption of coincidence is implicit in the general idea that 
economic agents are rational. Rational agents are expected to know their 
tastes, both present and future, and they are supposed to make good 
decisions that will maximize these interests. 

Experienced Utility 

My fascination with the possible discrepancies between experienced utility 
and decision utility goes back a long way. While Amos and I were still 
working on prospect theory, I formulated a puzzle, which went like this: 
imagine an individual who receives one painful injection every day. There 
is no adaptation; the pain is the same day to day. Will people attach the 
same value to reducing the number of planned injections from 20 to 18 as 
from 6 to 4? Is there any justification for a distinction? 

I did not collect data, because the outcome was evident. Nbu can verify 
for yourself that you would pay more to reduce the number of injections by 
a third (from 6 to 4) than by one tenth (from 20 to 18). The decision utility of 
avoiding two injections is higher in the first case than in the second, and 
everyone will pay more for the first reduction than for the second. But this 
difference is absurd. If the pain does not change from day to day, what 
could justify assigning different utilities to a reduction of the total amount of 
pain by two injections, depending on the number of previous injections? In 
the terms we would use today, the puzzle introduced the idea that 



experienced utility could be measured by the number of injections. It also 
suggested that, at least in some cases, experienced utility is the criterion 
by which a decision should be assessed. A decision maker who pays 
different amounts to achieve the same gain of experienced utility (or be 
spared the same loss) is making a mistake. You may find this observation 
obvious, but in decision theory the only basis forjudging that a decision is 
wrong is inconsistency with other preferences. Amos and I discussed the 
problem but we did not pursue it. Many years later, I returned to it. 

Experience and Memory 

How can experienced utility be measured? How should we answer 
questions such as “How much pain did Helen suffer during the medical 
procedure?” or “How much enjoyment did she get from her 20 minutes on 
the beach?” T Jon e t8221; T Jhe British economist Francis Edgeworth 
speculated about this topic in the nineteenth century and proposed the 
idea of a “hedonimeter,” an imaginary instrument analogous to the devices 
used in weather-recording stations, which would measure the level of 
pleasure or pain that an individual experiences at any moment. 

Experienced utility would vary, much as daily temperature or barometric 
pressure do, and the results would be plotted as a function of time. The 
answer to the question of how much pain or pleasure Helen experienced 
during her medical procedure or vacation would be the “area under the 
curve.” Time plays a critical role in Edgeworth’s conception. If Helen stays 
on the beach for 40 minutes instead of 20, and her enjoyment remains as 
intense, then the total experienced utility of that episode doubles, just as 
doubling the number of injections makes a course of injections twice as 
bad. This was Edgeworth’s theory, and we now have a precise 
understanding of the conditions under which his theory holds. 

The graphs in figure 15 show profiles of the experiences of two patients 
undergoing a painful colonoscopy, drawn from a study that Don 
Redelmeier and I designed together. Redelmeier, a physician and 
researcher at the University of Toronto, carried it out in the early 1990s. 
This procedure is now routinely administered with an anesthetic as well as 
an amnesic drug, but these drugs were not as widespread when our data 
were collected. The patients were prompted every 60 seconds to indicate 
the level of pain they experienced at the moment. The data shown are on a 
scale where zero is “no pain at all” and 10 is “intolerable pain.” As you can 
see, the experience of each patient varied considerably during the 
procedure, which lasted 8 minutes for patient A and 24 minutes for patient 
B (the last reading of zero pain was recorded after the end of the 



procedure). A total of 154 patients participated in the experiment; the 
shortest procedure lasted 4 minutes, the longest 69 minutes. 

Next, consider an easy question: Assuming that the two patients used 
the scale of pain similarly, which patient suffered more? No contest. There 
is general agreement that patient B had the worse time. Patient B spent at 
least as much time as patient A at any level of pain, and the “area under 
the curve” is clearly larger for B than for A. The key factor, of course, is that 
B's procedure lasted much longer. I will call the measures based on 
reports of momentary pain hedonimeter totals. 



TIME (MINUTES) 



Figure 15 


When the procedure was over, all participants were asked to rate “the 
total amount of pain” they had experienced during the procedure. The 
wording was intended to encourage them to think of the integral of the pain 
they had reported, reproducing the hedonimeter totals. Surprisingly, the 
patients did nothing of the kind. The statistical analysis revealed two 
findings, which illustrate a pattern we have observed in other experiments: 


• Peak-end rule: The global retrospective rating was well predicted by 
the average of the level of pain reported at the worst moment of the 
experience and at its end. 

• Duration neglect: The duration of the procedure had no effect 
whatsoever on the ratings of total pain. 


You can now apply these rules to the profiles of patients A and B. The 
worst rati Jon er soever on ng (8 on the 10-point scale) was the same for 








both patients, but the last rating before the end of the procedure was 7 for 
patient A and only 1 for patient B. The peak-end average was therefore 7.5 
for patient A and only 4.5 for patient B. As expected, patient A retained a 
much worse memory of the episode than patient B. It was the bad luck of 
patient A that the procedure ended at a bad moment, leaving him with an 
unpleasant memory. 

We now have an embarrassment of riches: two measures of 
experienced utility—the hedonimeter total and the retrospective 
assessment—that are systematically different. The hedonimeter totals are 
computed by an observer from an individual’s report of the experience of 
moments. We call these judgments duration-weighted, because the 
computation of the “area under the curve” assigns equal weights to all 
moments: two minutes of pain at level 9 is twice as bad as one minute at 
the same level of pain. However, the findings of this experiment and others 
show that the retrospective assessments are insensitive to duration and 
weight two singular moments, the peak and the end, much more than 
others. So which should matter? What should the physician do? The 
choice has implications for medical practice. We noted that: 


• If the objective is to reduce patients’ memory of pain, lowering the 
peak intensity of pain could be more important than minimizing the 
duration of the procedure. By the same reasoning, gradual relief may 
be preferable to abrupt relief if patients retain a better memory when 
the pain at the end of the procedure is relatively mild. 

• If the objective is to reduce the amount of pain actually experienced, 
conducting the procedure swiftly may be appropriate even if doing so 
increases the peak pain intensity and leaves patients with an awful 
memory. 


Which of the two objectives did you find most compelling? I have not 
conducted a proper survey, but my impression is that a strong majority will 
come down in favor of reducing the memory of pain. I find it helpful to think 
of this dilemma as a conflict of interests between two selves (which do not 
correspond to the two familiar systems). The experiencing self is the one 
that answers the question: “Does it hurt now?” The remembering self is the 
one that answers the question: “How was it, on the whole?” Memories are 
all we get to keep from our experience of living, and the only perspective 
that we can adopt as we think about our lives is therefore that of the 
remembering self. 



A comment I heard from a member of the audience after a lecture 
illustrates the difficulty of distinguishing memories from experiences. He 
told of listening raptly to a long symphony on a disc that was scratched 
near the end, producing a shocking sound, and he reported that the bad 
ending “ruined the whole experience.” But the experience was not actually 
ruined, only the memory of it. The experiencing self had had an experience 
that was almost entirely good, and the bad end could not undo it, because 
it had already happened. My questioner had assigned the entire episode a 
failing grade because it had ended very badly, but that grade effectively 
ignored 40 minutes of musical bliss. Does the actual experience count for 
nothing? 

Confusing experience with the memory of it is a compelling cognitive 
illusion—and it is the substitution that makes us believe a past experience 
can be ruined. The experiencing self does not have a voice. The 
remembering self is sometimes wrong, but it is the one that keeps score 
and governs what we learn from living, and it is the one that makes 
decisions Jon thaperienci. What we learn from the past is to maximize the 
qualities of our future memories, not necessarily of our future experience. 
This is the tyranny of the remembering self. 

Which Self Should Count? 

To demonstrate the decision-making power of the remembering self, my 
colleagues and I designed an experiment, using a mild form of torture that I 
will call the cold-hand situation (its ugly technical name is cold-pressor). 
Participants are asked to hold their hand up to the wrist in painfully cold 
water until they are invited to remove it and are offered a warm towel. The 
subjects in our experiment used their free hand to control arrows on a 
keyboard to provide a continuous record of the pain they were enduring, a 
direct communication from their experiencing self. We chose a 
temperature that caused moderate but tolerable pain: the volunteer 
participants were of course free to remove their hand at any time, but none 
chose to do so. 

Each participant endured two cold-hand episodes: 

The short episode consisted of 60 seconds of immersion in 
water at 14° Celsius, which is experienced as painfully cold, but 
not intolerable. At the end of the 60 seconds, the experimenter 
instructed the participant to remove his hand from the water and 
offered a warm towel. 



The long episode lasted 90 seconds. Its first 60 seconds were 
identical to the short episode. The experimenter said nothing at 
all at the end of the 60 seconds. Instead he opened a valve that 
allowed slightly warmer water to flow into the tub. During the 
additional 30 seconds, the temperature of the water rose by 
roughly 1°, just enough for most subjects to detect a slight 
decrease in the intensity of pain. 

Our participants were told that they would have three cold-hand trials, but in 
fact they experienced only the short and the long episodes, each with a 
different hand. The trials were separated by seven minutes. Seven minutes 
after the second trial, the participants were given a choice about the third 
trial. They were told that one of their experiences would be repeated 
exactly, and were free to choose whether to repeat the experience they 
had had with their left hand or with their right hand. Of course, half the 
participants had the short trial with the left hand, half with the right; half had 
the short trial first, half began with the long, etc. This was a carefully 
controlled experiment. 

The experiment was designed to create a conflict between the interests 
of the experiencing and the remembering selves, and also between 
experienced utility and decision utility. From the perspective of the 
experiencing self, the long trial was obviously worse. We expected the 
remembering self to have another opinion. The peak-end rule predicts a 
worse memory for the short than for the long trial, and duration neglect 
predicts that the difference between 90 seconds and 60 seconds of pain 
will be ignored. We therefore predicted that the participants would have a 
more favorable (or less unfavorable) memory of the long trial and choose 
to repeat it. They did. Fully 80% of the participants who reported that their 
pain diminished during the final phase of the longer episode opted to 
repeat it, thereby declaring themselves willing to suffer 30 seconds of 
needless pain in the anticipated third trial. 

The subjects who preferred the long episode were not masochists and 
did not deliberately choose to expose themselves to the worse experience; 
they simply Jon the heigmade a mistake. If we had asked them, “Would 
you prefer a 90-second immersion or only the first part of it?” they would 
certainly have selected the short option. We did not use these words, 
however, and the subjects did what came naturally: they chose to repeat 
the episode of which they had the less aversive memory. The subjects 
knew quite well which of the two exposures was longer—we asked them— 
but they did not use that knowledge. Their decision was governed by a 
simple rule of intuitive choice: pick the option you like the most, or dislike 
the least. Rules of memory determined how much they disliked the two 



options, which in turn determined their choice. The cold-hand experiment, 
like my old injections puzzle, revealed a discrepancy between decision 
utility and experienced utility. 

The preferences we observed in this experiment are another example of 
the less-is-more effect that we have encountered on previous occasions. 
One was Christopher Hsee’s study in which adding dishes to a set of 24 
dishes lowered the total value because some of the added dishes were 
broken. Another was Linda, the activist woman who is judged more likely 
to be a feminist bank teller than a bank teller. The similarity is not 
accidental. 
The same operating feature of System 1 accounts for all three 
situations: System 1 represents sets by averages, norms, and prototypes, 
not by sums. Each cold-hand episode is a set of moments, which the 
remembering self stores as a prototypical moment. This leads to a conflict. 
For an objective observer evaluating the episode from the reports of the 
experiencing self, what counts is the “area under the curve” that integrates 
pain over time; it has the nature of a sum. The memory that the 
remembering self keeps, in contrast, is a representative moment, strongly 
influenced by the peak and the end. 

Of course, evolution could have designed animals’ memory to store 
integrals, as it surely does in some cases. It is important for a squirrel to 
“know” the total amount of food it has stored, and a representation of the 
average size of the nuts would not be a good substitute. However, the 
integral of pain or pleasure over time may be less biologically significant. 
We know, for example, that rats show duration neglect for both pleasure 
and pain. In one experiment, rats were consistently exposed to a sequence 
in which the onset of a light signals that an electric shock will soon be 
delivered. The rats quickly learned to fear the light, and the intensity of their 
fear could be measured by several physiological responses. The main 
finding was that the duration of the shock has little or no effect on fear—all 
that matters is the painful intensity of the stimulus. 

Other classic studies showed that electrical stimulation of specific areas 
in the rat brain (and of corresponding areas in the human brain) produce a 
sensation of intense pleasure, so intense in some cases that rats who can 
stimulate their brain by pressing a lever will die of starvation without taking 
a break to feed themselves. Pleasurable electric stimulation can be 
delivered in bursts that vary in intensity and duration. Here again, only 
intensity matters. Up to a point, increasing the duration of a burst of 
stimulation does not appear to increase the eagerness of the animal to 
obtain it. The rules that govern the remembering self of humans have a 
long evolutionary history. 



Biology vs. Rationality 


The most useful idea in the injections puzzle that preoccupied me years 
ago was that the experienced utility of a series of equally painful injections 
can be measured, by simply counting the injections. If all injections are 
equally aversive, then 20 of them are twice as bad as 10, and Jon e oe e a 
reduction from 20 to 18 and a reduction from 6 to 4 are equally valuable. If 
the decision utility does not correspond to the experienced utility, then 
something is wrong with the decision. The same logic played out in the 
cold-hand experiment: an episode of pain that lasts 90 seconds is worse 
than the first 60 seconds of that episode. If people willingly choose to 
endure the longer episode, something is wrong with their decision. In my 
early puzzle, the discrepancy between the decision and the experience 
originated from diminishing sensitivity: the difference between 18 and 20 
is less impressive, and appears to be worth less, than the difference 
between 6 and 4 injections. In the cold-hand experiment, the error reflects 
two principles of memory: duration neglect and the peak-end rule. The 
mechanisms are different but the outcome is the same: a decision that is 
not correctly attuned to the experience. 

Decisions that do not produce the best possible experience and 
erroneous forecasts of future feelings—both are bad news for believers in 
the rationality of choice. The cold-hand study showed that we cannot fully 
trust our preferences to reflect our interests, even if they are based on 
personal experience, and even if the memory of that experience was laid 
down within the last quarter of an hour! Tastes and decisions are shaped 
by memories, and the memories can be wrong. The evidence presents a 
profound challenge to the idea that humans have consistent preferences 
and know how to maximize them, a cornerstone of the rational-agent 
model. An inconsistency is built into the design of our minds. We have 
strong preferences about the duration of our experiences of pain and 
pleasure. We want pain to be brief and pleasure to last. But our memory, a 
function of System 1, has evolved to represent the most intense moment of 
an episode of pain or pleasure (the peak) and the feelings when the 
episode was at its end. A memory that neglects duration will not serve our 
preference for long pleasure and short pains. 

Speaking of Two Selves 


“You are thinking of your failed marriage entirely from the 
perspective of the remembering self. A divorce is like a 



symphony with a screeching sound at the end—the fact that it 
ended badly does not mean it was all bad.” 


“This is a bad case of duration neglect. You are giving the good 
and the bad part of your experience equal weight, although the 
good part lasted ten times as long as the other.” 



Life as a Story 


Early in the days of my work on the measurement of experience, I saw 
Verdi’s opera La Traviata. Known for its gorgeous music, it is also a 
moving story of the love between a young aristocrat and Violetta, a woman 
of the demimonde. The young man’s father approaches Violetta and 
convinces her to give up her lover, to protect the honor of the family and the 
marriage prospects of the young man’s sister. In an act of supreme self- 
sacrifice, Violetta pretends to reject the man she adores. She soon 
relapses into consumption (the nineteenth-century term for tuberculosis). In 
the final act, Violetta lies dying, surrounded by a few friends. Her beloved 
has been alerted and is rushing to Paris to see her. H Kto earing the news, 
she is transformed with hope and joy, but she is also deteriorating quickly. 

No matter how many times you have seen the opera, you are gripped by 
the tension and fear of the moment: Will the young lover arrive in time? 
There is a sense that it is immensely important for him to join his beloved 
before she dies. He does, of course, some marvelous love duets are sung, 
and after 10 minutes of glorious music Violetta dies. 

On my way home from the opera, I wondered: Why do we care so much 
about those last 10 minutes? I quickly realized that I did not care at all 
about the length of Violetta’s life. If I had been told that she died at age 27, 
not age 28 as I believed, the news that she had missed a year of happy life 
would not have moved me at all, but the possibility of missing the last 10 
minutes mattered a great deal. Furthermore, the emotion I felt about the 
lovers’ reunion would not have changed if I had learned that they actually 
had a week together, rather than 10 minutes. If the lover had come too late, 
however, La Traviata would have been an altogether different story. A story 
is about significant events and memorable moments, not about time 
passing. Duration neglect is normal in a story, and the ending often defines 
its character. The same core features appear in the rules of narratives and 
in the memories of colonoscopies, vacations, and films. This is how the 
remembering self works: it composes stories and keeps them for future 
reference. 

It is not only at the opera that we think of life as a story and wish it to end 
well. When we hear about the death of a woman who had been estranged 
from her daughter for many years, we want to know whether they were 
reconciled as death approached. We do not care only about the 
daughter’s feelings—it is the narrative of the mother’s life that we wish to 
improve. Caring for people often takes the form of concern for the quality of 
their stories, not for their feelings. Indeed, we can be deeply moved even 
by events that change the stories of people who are already dead. We feel 



pity for a man who died believing in his wife’s love for him, when we hear 
that she had a lover for many years and stayed with her husband only for 
his money. We pity the husband although he had lived a happy life. We feel 
the humiliation of a scientist who made an important discovery that was 
proved false after she died, although she did not experience the 
humiliation. Most important, of course, we all care intensely for the 
narrative of our own life and very much want it to be a good story, with a 
decent hero. 

The psychologist Ed Diener and his students wondered whether 
duration neglect and the peak-end rule would govern evaluations of entire 
lives. They used a short description of the life of a fictitious character called 
Jen, a never-married woman with no children, who died instantly and 
painlessly in an automobile accident. In one version of Jen’s story, she was 
extremely happy throughout her life (which lasted either 30 or 60 years), 
enjoying her work, taking vacations, spending time with her friends and on 
her hobbies. Another version added 5 extra years to Jen’s life, who now 
died either when she was 35 or 65. The extra years were described as 
pleasant but less so than before. After reading a schematic biography of 
Jen, each participant answered two questions: “Taking her life as a whole, 
how desirable do you think Jen’s life was?” and “How much total 
happiness or unhappiness would you say that Jen experienced in her life?” 

The results provided clear evidence of both duration neglect and a peak- 
end effect. In a between-subjects experiment (different participants saw 
different forms), doubling the duration of Jen’s life had Jto Aad Jto no 
effect whatsoever on the desirability of her life, or on judgments of the total 
happiness that Jen experienced. Clearly, her life was represented by a 
prototypical slice of time, not as a sequence of time slices. As a 
consequence, her “total happiness” was the happiness of a typical period 
in her lifetime, not the sum (or integral) of happiness over the duration of 
her life. 

As expected from this idea, Diener and his students also found a less- 
is-more effect, a strong indication that an average (prototype) has been 
substituted for a sum. Adding 5 “slightly happy” years to a very happy life 
caused a substantial drop in evaluations of the total happiness of that life. 

At my urging, they also collected data on the effect of the extra 5 years in 
a within-subject experiment; each participant made both judgments in 
immediate succession. In spite of my long experience with judgment 
errors, I did not believe that reasonable people could say that adding 5 
slightly happy years to a life would make it substantially worse. I was 
wrong. The intuition that the disappointing extra 5 years made the whole 
life worse was overwhelming. 

The pattern of judgments seemed so absurd that Diener and his 



students initially thought that it represented the folly of the young people 
who participated in their experiments. However, the pattern did not change 
when the parents and older friends of students answered the same 
questions. In intuitive evaluation of entire lives as well as brief episodes, 
peaks and ends matter but duration does not. 

The pains of labor and the benefits of vacations always come up as 
objections to the idea of duration neglect: we all share the intuition that it is 
much worse for labor to last 24 than 6 hours, and that 6 days at a good 
resort is better than 3. Duration appears to matter in these situations, but 
this is only because the quality of the end changes with the length of the 
episode. The mother is more depleted and helpless after 24 hours than 
after 6, and the vacationer is more refreshed and rested after 6 days than 
after 3. What truly matters when we intuitively assess such episodes is the 
progressive deterioration or improvement of the ongoing experience, and 
how the person feels at the end. 

Amnesic Vacations 

Consider the choice of a vacation. Do you prefer to enjoy a relaxing week 
at the familiar beach to which you went last year? Or do you hope to enrich 
your store of memories? Distinct industries have developed to cater to 
these alternatives: resorts offer restorative relaxation; tourism is about 
helping people construct stories and collect memories. The frenetic picture 
taking of many tourists suggests that storing memories is often an 
important goal, which shapes both the plans for the vacation and the 
experience of it. The photographer does not view the scene as a moment 
to be savored but as a future memory to be designed. Pictures may be 
useful to the remembering self—though we rarely look at them for very 
long, or as often as we expected, or even at all—but picture taking is not 
necessarily the best way for the tourist’s experiencing self to enjoy a view. 

In many cases we evaluate touristic vacations by the story and the 
memories that we expect to store. The word memorable is often used to 
describe vacation highlights, explicitly revealing the goal of the experience. 
In other situations—love comes to mind—the declaration that the present 
moment will never be forgotten, though not always accurate, changes the 
character of the moment. A self-consciously memorable experience gains 
a weight and a significance Jto Ace Jto that it would not otherwise have. 

Ed Diener and his team provided evidence that it is the remembering 
self that chooses vacations. They asked students to maintain daily diaries 
and record a daily evaluation of their experiences during spring break. The 
students also provided a global rating of the vacation when it had ended. 



Finally, they indicated whether or not they intended to repeat or not to 
repeat the vacation they had just had. Statistical analysis established that 
the intentions for future vacations were entirely determined by the final 
evaluation—even when that score did not accurately represent the quality 
of the experience that was described in the diaries. As in the cold-hand 
experiment, right or wrong, people choose by memory when they decide 
whether or not to repeat an experience. 

A thought experiment about your next vacation will allow you to observe 
your attitude to your experiencing self. 

At the end of the vacation, all pictures and videos will be 
destroyed. Furthermore, you will swallow a potion that will wipe 
out all your memories of the vacation. 


Flow would this prospect affect your vacation plans? Flow much 
would you be willing to pay for it, relative to a normally memorable 
vacation? 

While I have not formally studied the reactions to this scenario, my 
impression from discussing it with people is that the elimination of 
memories greatly reduces the value of the experience. In some cases, 
people treat themselves as they would treat another amnesic, choosing to 
maximize overall pleasure by returning to a place where they have been 
happy in the past. However, some people say that they would not bother to 
go at all, revealing that they care only about their remembering self, and 
care less about their amnesic experiencing self than about an amnesic 
stranger. Many point out that they would not send either themselves or 
another amnesic to climb mountains or trek through the jungle—because 
these experiences are mostly painful in real time and gain value from the 
expectation that both the pain and the joy of reaching the goal will be 
memorable. 

For another thought experiment, imagine you face a painful operation 
during which you will remain conscious, 'vbu are told you will scream in 
pain and beg the surgeon to stop. However, you are promised an 
amnesia-inducing drug that will completely wipe out any memory of the 
episode. How do you feel about such a prospect? Here again, my informal 
observation is that most people are remarkably indifferent to the pains of 
their experiencing self. Some say they don’t care at all. Others share my 
feeling, which is that I feel pity for my suffering self but not more than I would 
feel for a stranger in pain. Odd as it may seem, I am my remembering self, 
and the experiencing self, who does my living, is like a stranger to me. 



Speaking of Life as a Story 


“He is desperately trying to protect the narrative of a life of 
integrity, which is endangered by the latest episode.” 


“The length to which he was willing to go for a one-night encounter 
is a sign of total duration neglect.” 


“You seem to be devoting your entire vacation to the construction 
of memories. Perhaps you should put away the camera and enjoy 
the moment, even if it is not very memorable?” 


“She is an Alzheimer’s patient. She no longer maintains a 
narrative of her life, but her experiencing self is still sensitive to 
beauty and gentleness.” 



Experienced Well-Being 


When I became interested in the study of well-being about fifteen years 
ago, I quickly found out that almost everything that was known about the 
subject drew on the answers of millions of people to minor variations of a 
survey question, which was generally accepted as a measure of 
happiness. The question is clearly addressed to your remembering self, 
which is invited to think about your life: 

All things considered, how satisfied are you with your life as a 
whole these days? 

Having come to the topic of well-being from the study of the mistaken 
memories of colonoscopies and painfully cold hands, I was naturally 
suspicious of global satisfaction with life as a valid measure of well-being. 
As the remembering self had not proved to be a good witness in my 
experiments, I focused on the well-being of the experiencing self. I 
proposed that it made sense to say that “Helen was happy in the month of 
March” if 


she spent most of her time engaged in activities that she would 
rather continue than stop, little time in situations she wished to 
escape, and—very important because life is short—not too much 
time in a neutral state in which she would not care either way. 

There are many different experiences we would rather continue than 
stop, including both mental and physical pleasures. One of the examples I 
had in mind for a situation that Helen would wish to continue is total 
absorption in a task, which Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi calls flow—a state that 
some artists experience in their creative moments and that many other 
people achieve when enthralled by a film, a book, or a crossword puzzle: 
interruptions are not welcome in any of these situations. I also had 
memories of a happy early childhood in which I always cried when my 
mother came to tear me away from my toys to take me to the park, and 
cried again when she took me away from the swings and the slide. The 
resistance to interruption was a sign I had been having a good time, both 
with my toys and with the swings. 

I proposed to measure Helen’s objective happiness precisely as we 
assessed the experience of the two colonoscopy patients, by evaluating a 
profile of the well-being she experienced over successive moments of her 
life. In this I was following Edgeworth’s hedonimeter method of a century 



earlier. In my initial enthusiasm for this approach, I was inclined to dismiss 
Helen’s remembering self as an error-prone witness to the actual well¬ 
being of her experiencing self. I suspected this position was too extreme, 
which it turned out to be, but it was a good start. 

n="4 "&gt;Experienced Well-Being 

I assembled “a dream team” that included three other psychologists of 
different specialties and one economist, and we set out together to 
develop a measure of the well-being of the experiencing self. A continuous 
record of experience was unfortunately impossible—a person cannot live 
normally while constantly reporting her experiences. The closest alternative 
was experience sampling, a method that Csikszentmihalyi had invented. 
Technology has advanced since its first uses. Experience sampling is now 
implemented by programming an individual’s cell phone to beep or vibrate 
at random intervals during the day. The phone then presents a brief menu 
of questions about what the respondent was doing and who was with her 
when she was interrupted. The participant is also shown rating scales to 
report the intensity of various feelings: happiness, tension, anger, worry, 
engagement, physical pain, and others. 

Experience sampling is expensive and burdensome (although less 
disturbing than most people initially expect; answering the questions takes 
very little time). A more practical alternative was needed, so we developed 
a method that we called the Day Reconstruction Method (DRM). We hoped 
it would approximate the results of experience sampling and provide 
additional information about the way people spend their time. Participants 
(all women, in the early studies) were invited to a two-hour session. We 
first asked them to relive the previous day in detail, breaking it up into 
episodes like scenes in a film. Later, they answered menus of questions 
about each episode, based on the experience-sampling method. They 
selected activities in which they were engaged from a list and indicated the 
one to which they paid most attention. They also listed the individuals they 
had been with, and rated the intensity of several feelings on separate 0-6 
scales (0 = the absence of the feeling; 6 = most intense feeling). Our 
method drew on evidence that people who are able to retrieve a past 
situation in detail are also able to relive the feelings that accompanied it, 
even experiencing their earlier physiological indications of emotion. 

We assumed that our participants would fairly accurately recover the 
feeling of a prototypical moment of the episode. Several comparisons with 
experience sampling confirmed the validity of the DRM. Because the 
participants also reported the times at which episodes began and ended, 
we were able to compute a duration-weighted measure of their feeling 



during the entire waking day. Longer episodes counted more than short 
episodes in our summary measure of daily affect. Our questionnaire also 
included measures of life satisfaction, which we interpreted as the 
satisfaction of the remembering self. We used the DRM to study the 
determinants of both emotional well-being and life satisfaction in several 
thousand women in the United States, France, and Denmark. 

The experience of a moment or an episode is not easily represented by 
a single happiness value. There are many variants of positive feelings, 
including love, joy, engagement, hope, amusement, and many others. 
Negative emotions also come in many varieties, including anger, shame, 
depression, and loneliness. Although positive and negative emotions exist 
at the same time, it is possible to classify most moments of life as 
ultimately positive or negative. We could identify unpleasant episodes by 
comparing the ratings of positive and negative adjectives. We called an 
episode unpleasant if a negative feeling was assigned a higher rating than 
all the positive feelings. We found that American women spent about 19% 
of the time in an unpleasant state, somewhat higher than French women 
(16%) or Danish women (14%). 

We called the percentage Jr"&gt;n Qge Jr"&gt;of time that an individual 
spends in an unpleasant state the U-index. For example, an individual who 
spent 4 hours of a 16-hour waking day in an unpleasant state would have a 
U-index of 25%. The appeal of the U-index is that it is based not on a 
rating scale but on an objective measurement of time. If the U-index for a 
population drops from 20% to 18%, you can infer that the total time that the 
population spent in emotional discomfort or pain has diminished by a 
tenth. 

A striking observation was the extent of inequality in the distribution of 
emotional pain. About half our participants reported going through an 
entire day without experiencing an unpleasant episode. On the other hand, 
a significant minority of the population experienced considerable 
emotional distress for much of the day. It appears that a small fraction of 
the population does most of the suffering—whether because of physical or 
mental illness, an unhappy temperament, or the misfortunes and personal 
tragedies in their life. 

A U-index can also be computed for activities. For example, we can 
measure the proportion of time that people spend in a negative emotional 
state while commuting, working, or interacting with their parents, spouses, 
or children. For 1,000 American women in a Midwestern city, the U-index 
was 29% for the morning commute, 27% for work, 24% for child care, 18% 
for housework, 12% for socializing, 12% for TV watching, and 5% for sex. 
The U-index was higher by about 6% on weekdays than it was on 
weekends, mostly because on weekends people spend less time in 



activities they dislike and do not suffer the tension and stress associated 
with work. The biggest surprise was the emotional experience of the time 
spent with one’s children, which for American women was slightly less 
enjoyable than doing housework. Here we found one of the few contrasts 
between French and American women: Frenchwomen spend less time 
with their children but enjoy it more, perhaps because they have more 
access to child care and spend less of the afternoon driving children to 
various activities. 

An individual’s mood at any moment depends on her temperament and 
overall happiness, but emotional well-being also fluctuates considerably 
over the day and the week. The mood of the moment depends primarily on 
the current situation. Mood at work, for example, is largely unaffected by 
the factors that influence general job satisfaction, including benefits and 
status. More important are situational factors such as an opportunity to 
socialize with coworkers, exposure to loud noise, time pressure (a 
significant source of negative affect), and the immediate presence of a 
boss (in our first study, the only thing that was worse than being alone). 
Attention is key. Our emotional state is largely determined by what we 
attend to, and we are normally focused on our current activity and 
immediate environment. There are exceptions, where the quality of 
subjective experience is dominated by recurrent thoughts rather than by the 
events of the moment. When happily in love, we may feel joy even when 
caught in traffic, and if grieving, we may remain depressed when watching 
a funny movie. In normal circumstances, however, we draw pleasure and 
pain from what is happening at the moment, if we attend to it. To get 
pleasure from eating, for example, you must notice that you are doing it. 
We found that French and American women spent about the same amount 
of time eating, but for Frenchwomen, eating was twice as likely to be focal 
as it was for American women. The Americans were far more prone to 
combine eating with other activities, and their pleasure from eating was 
correspondingly diluted. 

These observations have implications for both individuals and society. 
The use of time is one of the areas of life over which people have some 
control. Few individuals can will themselves to ha Jr"&gt;n Q ha Jr"&gt;ve a 
sunnier disposition, but some may be able to arrange their lives to spend 
less of their day commuting, and more time doing things they enjoy with 
people they like. The feelings associated with different activities suggest 
that another way to improve experience is to switch time from passive 
leisure, such as TV watching, to more active forms of leisure, including 
socializing and exercise. From the social perspective, improved 
transportation for the labor force, availability of child care for working 



women, and improved socializing opportunities for the elderly may be 
relatively efficient ways to reduce the U-index of society—even a reduction 
by 1% would be a significant achievement, amounting to millions of hours 
of avoided suffering. Combined national surveys of time use and of 
experienced well-being can inform social policy in multiple ways. The 
economist on our team, Alan Krueger, took the lead in an effort to 
introduce elements of this method into national statistics. 


Measures of experienced well-being are now routinely used in large-scale 
national surveys in the United States, Canada, and Europe, and the Gallup 
World Poll has extended these measurements to millions of respondents in 
the United States and in more than 150 countries. The polls elicit reports of 
the emotions experienced during the previous day, though in less detail 
than the DRM. The gigantic samples allow extremely fine analyses, which 
have confirmed the importance of situational factors, physical health, and 
social contact in experienced well-being. Not surprisingly, a headache will 
make a person miserable, and the second best predictor of the feelings of 
a day is whether a person did or did not have contacts with friends or 
relatives. It is only a slight exaggeration to say that happiness is the 
experience of spending time with people you love and who love you. 

The Gallup data permit a comparison of two aspects of well-being: 


• the well-being that people experience as they live their lives 

• the judgment they make when they evaluate their life 


Gallup’s life evaluation is measured by a question known as the Cantril 
Self-Anchoring Striving Scale: 

Please imagine a ladder with steps numbered from zero at the 
bottom to 10 at the top. The top of the ladder represents the best 
possible life for you and the bottom of the ladder represents the 
worst possible life for you. On which step of the ladder would you 
say you personally feel you stand at this time? 

Some aspects of life have more effect on the evaluation of one’s life than 
on the experience of living. Educational attainment is an example. More 
education is associated with higher evaluation of one’s life, but not with 
greater experienced well-being. Indeed, at least in the United States, the 



more educated tend to report higher stress. On the other hand, ill health 
has a much stronger adverse effect on experienced well-being than on life 
evaluation. Living with children also imposes a significant cost in the 
currency of daily feelings—reports of stress and anger are common 
among parents, but the adverse effects on life evaluation are smaller. 
Religious participation also has relatively greater favorable impact on both 
positive affect and stress reduction than on life evaluation. Surprisingly, 
however, religion provides no reduction of feelings of depression or worry. 

An analysis of more than 450,000 responses to the Gallup-Healthways 
Well-Bei Jr"&gt;n QBei Jr"&gt;ng Index, a daily survey of 1,000 Americans, 
provides a surprisingly definite answer to the most frequently asked 
question in well-being research: Can money buy happiness? The 
conclusion is that being poor makes one miserable, and that being rich 
may enhance one’s life satisfaction, but does not (on average) improve 
experienced well-being. 

Severe poverty amplifies the experienced effects of other misfortunes of 
life. In particular, illness is much worse for the very poor than for those who 
are more comfortable. A headache increases the proportion reporting 
sadness and worry from 19% to 38% for individuals in the top two-thirds of 
the income distribution. The corresponding numbers for the poorest tenth 
are 38% and 70%—a higher baseline level and a much larger increase. 
Significant differences between the very poor and others are also found for 
the effects of divorce and loneliness. Furthermore, the beneficial effects of 
the weekend on experienced well-being are significantly smaller for the 
very poor than for most everyone else. 

The satiation level beyond which experienced well-being no longer 
increases was a household income of about $75,000 in high-cost areas (it 
could be less in areas where the cost of living is lower). The average 
increase of experienced well-being associated with incomes beyond that 
level was precisely zero. This is surprising because higher income 
undoubtedly permits the purchase of many pleasures, including vacations 
in interesting places and opera tickets, as well as an improved living 
environment. Why do these added pleasures not show up in reports of 
emotional experience? A plausible interpretation is that higher income is 
associated with a reduced ability to enjoy the small pleasures of life. There 
is suggestive evidence in favor of this idea: priming students with the idea 
of wealth reduces the pleasure their face expresses as they eat a bar of 
chocolate! 

There is a clear contrast between the effects of income on experienced 
well-being and on life satisfaction. Higher income brings with it higher 
satisfaction, well beyond the point at which it ceases to have any positive 
effect on experience. The general conclusion is as clear for well-being as it 



was for colonoscopies: people’s evaluations of their lives and their actual 
experience may be related, but they are also different. Life satisfaction is 
not a flawed measure of their experienced well-being, as I thought some 
years ago. It is something else entirely. 

Speaking of Experienced Well-Being 


“The objective of policy should be to reduce human suffering. We 
aim for a lower U-index in society. Dealing with depression and 
extreme poverty should be a priority.” 


“The easiest way to increase happiness is to control your use of 
time. Can you find more time to do the things you enjoy doing?” 


“Beyond the satiation level of income, you can buy more 
pleasurable experiences, but you will lose some of your ability to 
enjoy the less expensive ones.” 



Thinking About Life 


Figure 16 is taken from an analysis by Andrew Clark, Ed Diener, and 
Yannis Georgellis of the German Socio-Economic Panel, in which the 
same respondents were asked every year about their satisfaction with 
their life. Respondents also reported major changes that had occurred in 
their circumstances during the preceding year. The graph shows the level 
of satisfaction reported by people around the time they got married. 

MARRIAGE 



Figure 16 


The graph reliably evokes nervous laughter from audiences, and the 
nervousness is easy to understand: after all, people who decide to get 
married do so either because they expect it will make them happier or 
because they hope that making a tie permanent will maintain the present 
state of bliss. In the useful term introduced by Daniel Gilbert and Timothy 
Wilson, the decision to get married reflects, for many people, a massive 
error of affective forecasting. On their wedding day, the bride and the 
groom know that the rate of divorce is high and that the incidence of 
marital disappointment is even higher, but they do not believe that these 
statistics apply to them. 

The startling news of figure 16 is the steep decline of life satisfaction. 
The graph is commonly interpreted as tracing a process of adaptation, in 
which the early joys of marriage quickly disappear as the experiences 
become routine. However, another approach is possible, which focuses on 
heuristics of judgment. Here we ask what happens in people’s minds when 








they are asked to evaluate their life. The questions “How satisfied are you 
with your life as a whole?” and “How happy are you these days?” are not as 
simple as “What is your telephone number?” How do survey participants 
manage to answer such questions in a few seconds, as all do? It will help 
to think of this as another judgment. As is also the case for other questions, 
some people may have a ready-made answer, which they had produced 
on another occasion in which they evaluated their life. Others, probably the 
majority, do not quickly find a response to the exact question they were 
asked, and automatically make their task easier by substituting the answer 
to another question. System 1 is at work. When we look at figure 16 in this 
light, it takes on a different meaning. 

The answers to many simple questions can be substituted for a global 
evaluation of life. You remember the study in which students who had just 
been asked how many dates they had in the previous month reported their 
“happiness these days” as if dating was the only significant fact in their life. 
In another well-known experiment in the same vein, Norbert Schwarz and 
his colleagues invited subjects to the lab to complete a questionnaire on 
life satisfaction. Before they began that task, however, he asked them to 
photocopy a sheet of paper for him. Half the respondents found a dime on 
the copying machine, planted there by the experimenter. The minor lucky 
incident caused a marked improvement in subjects’ reported satisfaction 
with their life as a whole! A mood heuristic is one way to answer life- 
satisfaction questions. 

The dating survey and the coin-on-the-machine experiment 
demonstrated, as intended, that the responses to global well-being 
questions should be taken with a grain of salt. But of course your current 
mood is not the only thing that comes to mind when you are asked to 
evaluate your life. You are likely to be reminded of significant events in your 
recent past or near future; of recurrent concerns, such as the health JghtA5 
alth Jght of a spouse or the bad company that your teenager keeps; of 
important achievements and painful failures. A few ideas that are relevant 
to the question will occur to you; many others will not. Even when it is not 
influenced by completely irrelevant accidents such as the coin on the 
machine, the score that you quickly assign to your life is determined by a 
small sample of highly available ideas, not by a careful weighting of the 
domains of your life. 

People who recently married, or are expecting to marry in the near 
future, are likely to retrieve that fact when asked a general question about 
their life. Because marriage is almost always voluntary in the United 
States, almost everyone who is reminded of his or her recent or 
forthcoming marriage will be happy with the idea. Attention is the key to the 



puzzle. Figure 16 can be read as a graph of the likelihood that people will 
think of their recent or forthcoming marriage when asked about their life. 
The salience of this thought is bound to diminish with the passage of time, 
as its novelty wanes. 

The figure shows an unusually high level of life satisfaction that lasts two 
or three years around the event of marriage. However, if this apparent 
surge reflects the time course of a heuristic for answering the question, 
there is little we can learn from it about either happiness or about the 
process of adaptation to marriage. We cannot infer from it that a tide of 
raised happiness lasts for several years and gradually recedes. Even 
people who are happy to be reminded of their marriage when asked a 
question about their life are not necessarily happier the rest of the time. 
Unless they think happy thoughts about their marriage during much of their 
day, it will not directly influence their happiness. Even newlyweds who are 
lucky enough to enjoy a state of happy preoccupation with their love will 
eventually return to earth, and their experienced well-being will again 
depend, as it does for the rest of us, on the environment and activities of 
the present moment. 

In the DRM studies, there was no overall difference in experienced well¬ 
being between women who lived with a mate and women who did not. The 
details of how the two groups used their time explained the finding. 
Women who have a mate spend less time alone, but also much less time 
with friends. They spend more time making love, which is wonderful, but 
also more time doing housework, preparing food, and caring for children, 
all relatively unpopular activities. And of course, the large amount of time 
married women spend with their husband is much more pleasant for some 
than for others. Experienced well-being is on average unaffected by 
marriage, not because marriage makes no difference to happiness but 
because it changes some aspects of life for the better and others for the 
worse. 


One reason for the low correlations between individuals’ circumstances 
and their satisfaction with life is that both experienced happiness and life 
satisfaction are largely determined by the genetics of temperament. A 
disposition for well-being is as heritable as height or intelligence, as 
demonstrated by studies of twins separated at birth. People who appear 
equally fortunate vary greatly in how happy they are. In some instances, as 
in the case of marriage, the correlations with well-being are low because of 
balancing effects. The same situation may be good for some people and 
bad for others, and new circumstances have both benefits and costs. In 
other cases, such as high income, the effects on life satisfaction are 



generally positive, but the picture is complicated by the fact that some 
people care much more about money than others do. 

A large-scale study of the impact of higher education, which was 
conducted for JghtA5 aor Jghtanother purpose, revealed striking evidence 
of the lifelong effects of the goals that young people set for themselves. 
The relevant data were drawn from questionnaires collected in 1995-1997 
from approximately 12,000 people who had started their higher education 
in elite schools in 1976. When they were 17 or 18, the participants had 
filled out a questionnaire in which they rated the goal of “being very well-off 
financially” on a 4-point scale ranging from “not important” to “essential.” 
The questionnaire they completed twenty years later included measures of 
their income in 1995, as well as a global measure of life satisfaction. 

Goals make a large difference. Nineteen years after they stated their 
financial aspirations, many of the people who wanted a high income had 
achieved it. Among the 597 physicians and other medical professionals in 
the sample, for example, each additional point on the money-importance 
scale was associated with an increment of over $14,000 of job income in 
1995 dollars! Nonworking married women were also likely to have 
satisfied their financial ambitions. Each point on the scale translated into 
more than $12,000 of added household income for these women, evidently 
through the earnings of their spouse. 

The importance that people attached to income at age 18 also 
anticipated their satisfaction with their income as adults. We compared life 
satisfaction in a high-income group (more than $200,000 household 
income) to a low- to moderate-income group (less than $50,000). The 
effect of income on life satisfaction was larger for those who had listed 
being well-off financially as an essential goal: .57 point on a 5-point scale. 
The corresponding difference for those who had indicated that money was 
not important was only .12. The people who wanted money and got it were 
significantly more satisfied than average; those who wanted money and 
didn’t get it were significantly more dissatisfied. The same principle 
applies to other goals—one recipe for a dissatisfied adulthood is setting 
goals that are especially difficult to attain. Measured by life satisfaction 20 
years later, the least promising goal that a young person could have was 
“becoming accomplished in a performing art.” Teenagers’ goals influence 
what happens to them, where they end up, and how satisfied they are. 

In part because of these findings I have changed my mind about the 
definition of well-being. The goals that people set for themselves are so 
important to what they do and how they feel about it that an exclusive focus 
on experienced well-being is not tenable. We cannot hold a concept of 
well-being that ignores what people want. On the other hand, it is also true 



that a concept of well-being that ignores how people feel as they live and 
focuses only on how they feel when they think about their life is also 
untenable. We must accept the complexities of a hybrid view, in which the 
well-being of both selves is considered. 

The Focusing Illusion 

We can infer from the speed with which people respond to questions about 
their life, and from the effects of current mood on their responses, that they 
do not engage in a careful examination when they evaluate their life. They 
must be using heuristics, which are examples of both substitution and 
WYSIATI. Although their view of their life was influenced by a question 
about dating or by a coin on the copying machine, the participants in these 
studies did not forget that there is more to life than dating or feeling lucky. 
The concept of happiness is not suddenly changed by finding a dime, but 
System 1 readily substitutes a small part of it for the whole of it. Any aspect 
of life to which attention is directed will loom JghtA5 aoom Jght large in a 
global evaluation. This is the essence of the focusing illusion, which can 
be described in a single sentence: 

Nothing in life is as important as you think it is when you are 

thinking about it. 

The origin of this idea was a family debate about moving from California to 
Princeton, in which my wife claimed that people are happier in California 
than on the East Coast. I argued that climate is demonstrably not an 
important determinant of well-being—the Scandinavian countries are 
probably the happiest in the world. I observed that permanent life 
circumstances have little effect on well-being and tried in vain to convince 
my wife that her intuitions about the happiness of Californians were an 
error of affective forecasting. 

A short time later, with this debate still on my mind, I participated in a 
workshop about the social science of global warming. A colleague made 
an argument that was based on his view of the well-being of the population 
of planet Earth in the next century. I argued that it was preposterous to 
forecast what it would be like to live on a warmer planet when we did not 
even know what it is like to live in California. Soon after that exchange, my 
colleague David Schkade and I were granted research funds to study two 
questions: Are people who live in California happier than others? and 
What are the popular beliefs about the relative happiness of Californians? 

We recruited large samples of students at major state universities in 
California, Ohio, and Michigan. From some of them we obtained a 



detailed report of their satisfaction with various aspects of their lives. From 
others we obtained a prediction of how someone “with your interests and 
values” who lived elsewhere would complete the same questionnaire. 

As we analyzed the data, it became obvious that I had won the family 
argument. As expected, the students in the two regions differed greatly in 
their attitude to their climate: the Californians enjoyed their climate and the 
Midwesterners despised theirs. But climate was not an important 
determinant of well-being. Indeed, there was no difference whatsoever 
between the life satisfaction of students in California and in the Midwest. 
We also found that my wife was not alone in her belief that Californians 
enjoy greater well-being than others. The students in both regions shared 
the same mistaken view, and we were able to trace their error to an 
exaggerated belief in the importance of climate. We described the error as 
a focusing illusion. 

The essence of the focusing illusion is WYSIATI, giving too much weight 
to the climate, too little to all the other determinants of well-being. To 
appreciate how strong this illusion is, take a few seconds to consider the 
question: 


How much pleasure do you get from your car? 

An answer came to your mind immediately; you know how much you like 
and enjoy your car. Now examine a different question: “When do you get 
pleasure from your car?” The answer to this question may surprise you, but 
it is straightforward: you get pleasure (or displeasure) from your car when 
you think about your car, which is probably not very often. Under normal 
circumstances, you do not spend much time thinking about your car when 
you are driving it. You think of other things as you drive, and your mood is 
determined by whatever you think about. Here again, when you tried to rate 
how much you enjoyed your car, you actually answered JghtA5 aed Jghta 
much narrower question: “How much pleasure do you get from your car 
v\hen you think about if?" The substitution caused you to ignore the fact 
that you rarely think about your car, a form of duration neglect. The upshot 
is a focusing illusion. If you like your car, you are likely to exaggerate the 
pleasure you derive from it, which will mislead you when you think of the 
virtues of your current vehicle as well as when you contemplate buying a 
new one. 

A similar bias distorts judgments of the happiness of Californians. When 
asked about the happiness of Californians, you probably conjure an image 
of someone attending to a distinctive aspect of the California experience, 
such as hiking in the summer or admiring the mild winter weather. The 



focusing illusion arises because Californians actually spend little time 
attending to these aspects of their life. Moreover, long-term Californians 
are unlikely to be reminded of the climate when asked for a global 
evaluation of their life. If you have been there all your life and do not travel 
much, living in California is like having ten toes: nice, but not something 
one thinks much about. Thoughts of any aspect of life are more likely to be 
salient if a contrasting alternative is highly available. 

People who recently moved to California will respond differently. 
Consider an enterprising soul who moved from Ohio to seek happiness in 
a better climate. For a few years following the move, a question about his 
satisfaction with life will probably remind him of the move and also evoke 
thoughts of the contrasting climates in the two states. The comparison will 
surely favor California, and the attention to that aspect of life may distort its 
true weight in experience. However, the focusing illusion can also bring 
comfort. Whether or not the individual is actually happier after the move, he 
will report himself happier, because thoughts of the climate will make him 
believe that he is. The focusing illusion can cause people to be wrong 
about their present state of well-being as well as about the happiness of 
others, and about their own happiness in the future. 

What proportion of the day do paraplegics spend in a bad 

mood? 

This question almost certainly made you think of a paraplegic who is 
currently thinking about some aspect of his condition. Your guess about a 
paraplegic’s mood is therefore likely to be accurate in the early days after 
a crippling accident; for some time after the event, accident victims think of 
little else. But over time, with few exceptions, attention is withdrawn from a 
new situation as it becomes more familiar. The main exceptions are 
chronic pain, constant exposure to loud noise, and severe depression. 
Pain and noise are biologically set to be signals that attract attention, and 
depression involves a self-reinforcing cycle of miserable thoughts. There is 
therefore no adaptation to these conditions. Paraplegia, however, is not 
one of the exceptions: detailed observations show that paraplegics are in 
a fairly good mood more than half of the time as early as one month 
following their accident—though their mood is certainly somber when they 
think about their situation. Most of the time, however, paraplegics work, 
read, enjoy jokes and friends, and get angry when they read about politics 
in the newspaper. When they are involved in any of these activities, they 
are not much different from anyone else, and we can expect the 
experienced well-being of paraplegics to be near normal much of the time. 
Adaptation to a new situation, whether good or bad, consists in large part 



of thinking less and less about it. In that sense, most long-term 
circumstances of life, including paraplegia and marriage, are part-time 
states that one inhabits only when one at JghtA5 a at Jghttends to them. 

One of the privileges of teaching at Princeton is the opportunity to guide 
bright undergraduates through a research thesis. And one of my favorite 
experiences in this vein was a project in which Beruria Cohn collected and 
analyzed data from a survey firm that asked respondents to estimate the 
proportion of time that paraplegics spend in a bad mood. She split her 
respondents into two groups: some were told that the crippling accident 
had occurred a month earlier, some a year earlier. In addition, each 
respondent indicated whether he or she knew a paraplegic personally. The 
two groups agreed closely in their judgment about the recent paraplegics: 
those who knew a paraplegic estimated 75% bad mood; those who had to 
imagine a paraplegic said 70%. In contrast, the two groups differed 
sharply in their estimates of the mood of paraplegics a year after the 
accidents: those who knew a paraplegic offered 41% as their estimate of 
the time in that bad mood. The estimates of those who were not personally 
acquainted with a paraplegic averaged 68%. Evidently, those who knew a 
paraplegic had observed the gradual withdrawal of attention from the 
condition, but others did not forecast that this adaptation would occur. 
Judgments about the mood of lottery winners one month and one year after 
the event showed exactly the same pattern. 

We can expect the life satisfaction of paraplegics and those afflicted by 
other chronic and burdensome conditions to be low relative to their 
experienced well-being, because the request to evaluate their lives will 
inevitably remind them of the life of others and of the life they used to lead. 
Consistent with this idea, recent studies of colostomy patients have 
produced dramatic inconsistencies between the patients’ experienced 
well-being and their evaluations of their lives. Experience sampling shows 
no difference in experienced happiness between these patients and a 
healthy population. Yet colostomy patients would be willing to trade away 
years of their life for a shorter life without the colostomy. Furthermore, 
patients whose colostomy has been reversed remember their time in this 
condition as awful, and they would give up even more of their remaining life 
not to have to return to it. Here it appears that the remembering self is 
subject to a massive focusing illusion about the life that the experiencing 
self endures quite comfortably. 

Daniel Gilbert and Timothy Wilson introduced the word mismnting to 
describe bad choices that arise from errors of affective forecasting. This 
word deserves to be in everyday language. The focusing illusion (which 
Gilbert and Wilson call focalism) is a rich source of miswanting. In 
particular, it makes us prone to exaggerate the effect of significant 



purchases or changed circumstances on our future well-being. 

Compare two commitments that will change some aspects of your life: 
buying a comfortable new car and joining a group that meets weekly, 
perhaps a poker or book club. Both experiences will be novel and exciting 
at the start. The crucial difference is that you will eventually pay little 
attention to the car as you drive it, but you will always attend to the social 
interaction to which you committed yourself. By WYSIATI, you are likely to 
exaggerate the long-term benefits of the car, but you are not likely to make 
the same mistake for a social gathering or for inherently attention¬ 
demanding activities such as playing tennis or learning to play the cello. 
The focusing illusion creates a bias in favor of goods and experiences that 
are initially exciting, even if they will eventually lose their appeal. Time is 
neglected, causing experiences that will retain their attention value in the 
long term to be appreciated less than they deserve to be. 

Time and Time Again 

The role of time has been a refrain in this part of the book. It is logical to 
describe the life of the experiencing self as a series of moments, each with 
a value. The value of an episode—I have called it a hedonimeter total—is 
simply the sum of the values of its moments. But this is not how the mind 
represents episodes. The remembering self, as I have described it, also 
tells stories and makes choices, and neither the stories nor the choices 
properly represent time. In storytelling mode, an episode is represented by 
a few critical moments, especially the beginning, the peak, and the end. 
Duration is neglected. We saw this focus on singular moments both in the 
cold-hand situation and in Violetta’s story. 

We saw a different form of duration neglect in prospect theory, in which 
a state is represented by the transition to it. Winning a lottery yields a new 
state of wealth that will endure for some time, but decision utility 
corresponds to the anticipated intensity of the reaction to the news that one 
has won. The withdrawal of attention and other adaptations to the new 
state are neglected, as only that thin slice of time is considered. The same 
focus on the transition to the new state and the same neglect of time and 
adaptation are found in forecasts of the reaction to chronic diseases, and 
of course in the focusing illusion. The mistake that people make in the 
focusing illusion involves attention to selected moments and neglect of 
what happens at other times. The mind is good with stories, but it does not 
appear to be well designed for the processing of time. 

During the last ten years we have learned many new facts about 
happiness. But we have also learned that the word happiness does not 



have a simple meaning and should not be used as if it does. Sometimes 
scientific progress leaves us more puzzled than we were before. 

Speaking of Thinking About Life 


“She thought that buying a fancy car would make her happier, but 
it turned out to be an error of affective forecasting.” 


“His car broke down on the way to work this morning and he’s in 
a foul mood. This is not a good day to ask him about his job 
satisfaction!” 


“She looks quite cheerful most of the time, but when she is asked 
she says she is very unhappy. The question must make her think 
of her recent divorce.” 


“Buying a larger house may not make us happier in the long term. 
We could be suffering from a focusing illusion.” 


“He has chosen to split his time between two cities. Probably a 
serious case of miswanting.” 



Conclusions 


I began this book by introducing two fictitious characters, spent some time 
discussing two species, and ended with two selves. The two characters 
were the intuitive System 1, which does JghtA5 '.J5 the fast thinking, and 
the effortful and slower System 2, which does the slow thinking, monitors 
System 1, and maintains control as best it can within its limited resources. 
The two species were the fictitious Econs, who live in the land of theory, 
and the Humans, who act in the real world. The two selves are the 
experiencing self, which does the living, and the remembering self, which 
keeps score and makes the choices. In this final chapter I consider some 
applications of the three distinctions, taking them in reverse order. 

Two Selves 

The possibility of conflicts between the remembering self and the interests 
of the experiencing self turned out to be a harder problem than I initially 
thought. In an early experiment, the cold-hand study, the combination of 
duration neglect and the peak-end rule led to choices that were manifestly 
absurd. Why would people willingly expose themselves to unnecessary 
pain? Our subjects left the choice to their remembering self, preferring to 
repeat the trial that left the better memory, although it involved more pain. 
Choosing by the quality of the memory may be justified in extreme cases, 
for example when post-traumatic stress is a possibility, but the cold-hand 
experience was not traumatic. An objective observer making the choice for 
someone else would undoubtedly choose the short exposure, favoring the 
sufferer’s experiencing self. The choices that people made on their own 
behalf are fairly described as mistakes. Duration neglect and the peak-end 
rule in the evaluation of stories, both at the opera and in judgments of Jen’s 
life, are equally indefensible. It does not make sense to evaluate an entire 
life by its last moments, or to give no weight to duration in deciding which 
life is more desirable. 

The remembering self is a construction of System 2. However, the 
distinctive features of the way it evaluates episodes and lives are 
characteristics of our memory. Duration neglect and the peak-end rule 
originate in System 1 and do not necessarily correspond to the values of 
System 2. We believe that duration is important, but our memory tells us it 
is not. The rules that govern the evaluation of the past are poor guides for 
decision making, because time does matter. The central fact of our 



existence is that time is the ultimate finite resource, but the remembering 
self ignores that reality. The neglect of duration combined with the peak- 
end rule causes a bias that favors a short period of intense joy over a long 
period of moderate happiness. The mirror image of the same bias makes 
us fear a short period of intense but tolerable suffering more than we fear a 
much longer period of moderate pain. Duration neglect also makes us 
prone to accept a long period of mild unpleasantness because the end will 
be better, and it favors giving up an opportunity for a long happy period if it 
is likely to have a poor ending. To drive the same idea to the point of 
discomfort, consider the common admonition, “Don’t do it, you will regret 
it.” The advice sounds wise because anticipated regret is the verdict of the 
remembering self and we are inclined to accept such judgments as final 
and conclusive. We should not forget, however, that the perspective of the 
remembering self is not always correct. An objective observer of the 
hedonimeter profile, with the interests of the experiencing self in mind, 
might well offer different advice. The remembering seifs neglect of 
duration, its exaggerated emphasis on peaks and ends, and its 
susceptibility to hindsight combine to yield distorted reflections of our 
actual experience. 

In contrast, the duration-weighted conception of well-being treats all 
moments of life alike, memorable or not. Some moments end up weighted 
more than others, either because they are memorable Sareeva or 
because they are important. The time that people spend dwelling on a 
memorable moment should be included in its duration, adding to its 
weight. A moment can also gain importance by altering the experience of 
subsequent moments. For example, an hour spent practicing the violin may 
enhance the experience of many hours of playing or listening to music 
years later. Similarly, a brief awful event that causes PTSD should be 
weighted by the total duration of the long-term misery it causes. In the 
duration-weighted perspective, we can determine only after the fact that a 
moment is memorable or meaningful. The statements “I will always 
remember...” or “this is a meaningful moment” should be taken as 
promises or predictions, which can be false—and often are—even when 
uttered with complete sincerity. It is a good bet that many of the things we 
say we will always remember will be long forgotten ten years later. 

The logic of duration weighting is compelling, but it cannot be 
considered a complete theory of well-being because individuals identify 
with their remembering self and care about their story. A theory of well¬ 
being that ignores what people want cannot be sustained. On the other 
hand, a theory that ignores what actually happens in people’s lives and 
focuses exclusively on what they think about their life is not tenable either. 



The remembering self and the experiencing self must both be considered, 
because their interests do not always coincide. Philosophers could 
struggle with these questions for a long time. 

The issue of which of the two selves matters more is not a question only 
for philosophers; it has implications for policies in several domains, 
notably medicine and welfare. Consider the investment that should be 
made in the treatment of various medical conditions, including blindness, 
deafness, or kidney failure. Should the investments be determined by how 
much people fear these conditions? Should investments be guided by the 
suffering that patients actually experience? Or should they follow the 
intensity of the patients’ desire to be relieved from their condition and by 
the sacrifices that they would be willing to make to achieve that relief? The 
ranking of blindness and deafness, or of colostomy and dialysis, might well 
be different depending on which measure of the severity of suffering is 
used. No easy solution is in sight, but the issue is too important to be 
ignored. 

The possibility of using measures of well-being as indicators to guide 
government policies has attracted considerable recent interest, both 
among academics and in several governments in Europe. It is now 
conceivable, as it was not even a few years ago, that an index of the 
amount of suffering in society will someday be included in national 
statistics, along with measures of unempl
oyment, physical disability, and 
income. This project has come a long way. 

Econs and Humans 

In everyday speech, we call people reasonable if it is possible to reason 
with them, if their beliefs are generally in tune with reality, and if their 
preferences are in line with their interests and their values. The word 
rational conveys an image of greater deliberation, more calculation, and 
less warmth, but in common language a rational person is certainly 
reasonable. For economists and decision theorists, the adjective has an 
altogether different meaning. The only test of rationality is not whether a 
person’s beliefs and preferences are reasonable, but whether they are 
internally consistent. A rational person can believe in ghosts so long as all 
her other beliefs are consistent with the existence of ghosts. A rational 
person can prefer being hated over being loved, so long as hi Sso as alls 
preferences are consistent. Rationality is logical coherence—reasonable 
or not. Econs are rational by this definition, but there is overwhelming 
evidence that Humans cannot be. An Econ would not be susceptible to 
priming, WYSIATI, narrow framing, the inside view, or preference 



reversals, which Humans cannot consistently avoid. 

The definition of rationality as coherence is impossibly restrictive; it 
demands adherence to rules of logic that a finite mind is not able to 
implement. Reasonable people cannot be rational by that definition, but 
they should not be branded as irrational for that reason. Irrational is a 
strong word, which connotes impulsivity, emotionality, and a stubborn 
resistance to reasonable argument. I often cringe when my work with Amos 
is credited with demonstrating that human choices are irrational, when in 
fact our research only showed that Humans are not well described by the 
rational-agent model. 

Although Humans are not irrational, they often need help to make more 
accurate judgments and better decisions, and in some cases policies and 
institutions can provide that help. These claims may seem innocuous, but 
they are in fact quite controversial. As interpreted by the important Chicago 
school of economics, faith in human rationality is closely linked to an 
ideology in which it is unnecessary and even immoral to protect people 
against their choices. Rational people should be free, and they should be 
responsible for taking care of themselves. Milton Friedman, the leading 
figure in that school, expressed this view in the title of one of his popular 
books: Free to Choose. 

The assumption that agents are rational provides the intellectual 
foundation for the libertarian approach to public policy: do not interfere with 
the individual’s right to choose, unless the choices harm others. Libertarian 
policies are further bolstered by admiration for the efficiency of markets in 
allocating goods to the people who are willing to pay the most for them. A 
famous example of the Chicago approach is titled A Theory of Rational 
Addiction ; it explains how a rational agent with a strong preference for 
intense and immediate gratification may make the rational decision to 
accept future addiction as a consequence. I once heard Gary Becker, one 
of the authors of that article, who is also a Nobel laureate of the Chicago 
school, argue in a lighter vein, but not entirely as a joke, that we should 
consider the possibility of explaining the so-called obesity epidemic by 
people’s belief that a cure for diabetes will soon become available. He 
was making a valuable point: when we observe people acting in ways that 
seem odd, we should first examine the possibility that they have a good 
reason to do what they do. Psychological interpretations should only be 
invoked when the reasons become implausible—which Becker’s 
explanation of obesity probably is. 

In a nation of Econs, government should keep out of the way, allowing 
the Econs to act as they choose, so long as they do not harm others. If a 
motorcycle rider chooses to ride without a helmet, a libertarian will support 



his right to do so. Citizens know what they are doing, even when they 
choose not to save for their old age, or when they expose themselves to 
addictive substances. There is sometimes a hard edge to this position: 
elderly people who did not save enough for retirement get little more 
sympathy than someone who complains about the bill after consuming a 
large meal at a restaurant. Much is therefore at stake in the debate 
between the Chicago school and the behavioral economists, who reject 
the extreme form of the rational-agent model. Freedom is not a contested 
value; all the participants in the debate are in favor of it. But life is more 
complex for behavioral economists than for tru S th17;e believers in human 
rationality. No behavioral economist favors a state that will force its citizens 
to eat a balanced diet and to watch only television programs that are good 
for the soul. For behavioral economists, however, freedom has a cost, 
which is borne by individuals who make bad choices, and by a society that 
feels obligated to help them. The decision of whether or not to protect 
individuals against their mistakes therefore presents a dilemma for 
behavioral economists. The economists of the Chicago school do not face 
that problem, because rational agents do not make mistakes. For 
adherents of this school, freedom is free of charge. 

In 2008 the economist Richard Thaler and the jurist Cass Sunstein 
teamed up to write a book, Nudge, which quickly became an international 
bestseller and the bible of behavioral economics. Their book introduced 
several new words into the language, including Econs and Humans. It also 
presented a set of solutions to the dilemma of how to help people make 
good decisions without curtailing their freedom. Thaler and Sunstein 
advocate a position of libertarian paternalism, in which the state and other 
institutions are allowed to nudge people to make decisions that serve their 
own long-term interests. The designation of joining a pension plan as the 
default option is an example of a nudge. It is difficult to argue that anyone’s 
freedom is diminished by being automatically enrolled in the plan, when 
they merely have to check a box to opt out. As we saw earlier, the framing 
of the individual’s decision—Thaler and Sunstein call it choice architecture 
—has a huge effect on the outcome. The nudge is based on sound 
psychology, which I described earlier. The default option is naturally 
perceived as the normal choice. Deviating from the normal choice is an act 
of commission, which requires more effortful deliberation, takes on more 
responsibility, and is more likely to evoke regret than doing nothing. These 
are powerful forces that may guide the decision of someone who is 
otherwise unsure of what to do. 

Humans, more than Econs, also need protection from others who 
deliberately exploit their weaknesses—and especially the quirks of System 



1 and the laziness of System 2. Rational agents are assumed to make 
important decisions carefully, and to use all the information that is provided 
to them. An Econ will read and understand the fine print of a contract 
before signing it, but Humans usually do not. An unscrupulous firm that 
designs contracts that customers will routinely sign without reading has 
considerable legal leeway in hiding important information in plain sight. A 
pernicious implication of the rational-agent model in its extreme form is 
that customers are assumed to need no protection beyond ensuring that 
the relevant information is disclosed. The size of the print and the 
complexity of the language in the disclosure are not considered relevant— 
an Econ knows how to deal with small print when it matters. In contrast, the 
recommendations of Nudge require firms to offer contracts that are 
sufficiently simple to be read and understood by Human customers. It is a 
good sign that some of these recommendations have encountered 
significant opposition from firms whose profits might suffer if their 
customers were better informed. A world in which firms compete by 
offering better products is preferable to one in which the winner is the firm 
that is best at obfuscation. 

A remarkable feature of libertarian paternalism is its appeal across a 
broad political spectrum. The flagship example of behavioral policy, called 
Save More Tomorrow, was sponsored in Congress by an unusual coalition 
that included extreme conservatives as well as liberals. Save More 
Tomorrow is a financial plan that firms can offer their employees. Those 
who sign on allow the employer to increa Syers liberalse their contribution 
to their saving plan by a fixed proportion whenever they receive a raise. 
The increased saving rate is implemented automatically until the employee 
gives notice that she wants to opt out of it. This brilliant innovation, 
proposed by Richard Thaler and Shlomo Benartzi in 2003, has now 
improved the savings rate and brightened the future prospects of millions 
of workers. It is soundly based in the psychological principles that readers 
of this book will recognize. It avoids the resistance to an immediate loss by 
requiring no immediate change; by tying increased saving to pay raises, it 
turns losses into foregone gains, which are much easier to bear; and the 
feature of automaticity aligns the laziness of System 2 with the long-term 
interests of the workers. All this, of course, without compelling anyone to do 
anything he does not wish to do and without any misdirection or artifice. 

The appeal of libertarian paternalism has been recognized in many 
countries, including the UK and South Korea, and by politicians of many 
stripes, including Tories and the Democratic administration of President 
Obama. Indeed, Britain’s government has created a new small unit whose 
mission is to apply the principles of behavioral science to help the 
government better accomplish its goals. The official name for this group is 



the Behavioural Insight Team, but it is known both in and out of government 
simply as the Nudge Unit. Thaler is an adviser to this team. 

In a storybook sequel to the writing of Nudge, Sunstein was invited by 
President Obama to serve as administrator of the Office of Information and 
Regulatory Affairs, a position that gave him considerable opportunity to 
encourage the application of the lessons of psychology and behavioral 
economics in government agencies. The mission is described in the 2010 
Report of the Office of Management and Budget. Readers of this book will 
appreciate the logic behind specific recommendations, including 
encouraging “clear, simple, salient, and meaningful disclosures.” They will 
also recognize background statements such as “presentation greatly 
matters; if, for example, a potential outcome is framed as a loss, it may 
have more impact than if it is presented as a gain.” 

The example of a regulation about the framing of disclosures concerning 
fuel consumption was mentioned earlier. Additional applications that have 
been implemented include automatic enrollment in health insurance, a new 
version of the dietary guidelines that replaces the incomprehensible Food 
Pyramid with the powerful image of a Food Plate loaded with a balanced 
diet, and a rule formulated by the USDA that permits the inclusion of 
messages such as “90% fat-free” on the label of meat products, provided 
that the statement “10% fat” is also displayed “contiguous to, in lettering of 
the same color, size, and type as, and on the same color background as, 
the statement of lean percentage.” Humans, unlike Econs, need help to 
make good decisions, and there are informed and unintrusive ways to 
provide that help. 


Two Systems 

This book has described the workings of the mind as an uneasy interaction 
between two fictitious characters: the automatic System 1 and the effortful 
System 2. You are now quite familiar with the personalities of the two 
systems and able to anticipate how they might respond in different 
situations. And of course you also remember that the two systems do not 
really exist in the brain or anywhere else. “System 1 does X” is a shortcut 
for “X occurs automatically.” And “System 2 is mobilized to do Y’ is a 
shortcut for “arousal increases, pupils dilate, attention is fo 
Stenations,cused, and activity Y is performed.” I hope you find the 
language of systems as helpful as I do, and that you have acquired an 
intuitive sense of how they work without getting confused by the question of 
whether they exist. Having delivered this necessary warning, I will continue 
to use the language to the end. 


The attentive System 2 is who we think we are. System 2 articulates 
judgments and makes choices, but it often endorses or rationalizes ideas 
and feelings that were generated by System 1. \bu may not know that you 
are optimistic about a project because something about its leader reminds 
you of your beloved sister, or that you dislike a person who looks vaguely 
like your dentist. If asked for an explanation, however, you will search your 
memory for presentable reasons and will certainly find some. Moreover, 
you will believe the story you make up. But System 2 is not merely an 
apologist for System 1; it also prevents many foolish thoughts and 
inappropriate impulses from overt expression. The investment of attention 
improves performance in numerous activities—think of the risks of driving 
through a narrow space while your mind is wandering—and is essential to 
some tasks, including comparison, choice, and ordered reasoning. 
However, System 2 is not a paragon of rationality. Its abilities are limited 
and so is the knowledge to which it has access. We do not always think 
straight when we reason, and the errors are not always due to intrusive and 
incorrect intuitions. Often we make mistakes because we (our System 2) 
do not know any better. 

I have spent more time describing System 1, and have devoted many 
pages to errors of intuitive judgment and choice that I attribute to it. 
However, the relative number of pages is a poor indicator of the balance 
between the marvels and the flaws of intuitive thinking. System 1 is indeed 
the origin of much that we do wrong, but it is also the origin of most of what 
we do right—which is most of what we do. Our thoughts and actions are 
routinely guided by System 1 and generally are on the mark. One of the 
marvels is the rich and detailed model of our world that is maintained in 
associative memory: it distinguishes surprising from normal events in a 
fraction of a second, immediately generates an idea of what was expected 
instead of a surprise, and automatically searches for some causal 
interpretation of surprises and of events as they take place. 

Memory also holds the vast repertory of skills we have acquired in a 
lifetime of practice, which automatically produce adequate solutions to 
challenges as they arise, from walking around a large stone on the path to 
averting the incipient outburst of a customer. The acquisition of skills 
requires a regular environment, an adequate opportunity to practice, and 
rapid and unequivocal feedback about the correctness of thoughts and 
actions. When these conditions are fulfilled, skill eventually develops, and 
the intuitive judgments and choices that quickly come to mind will mostly be 
accurate. All this is the work of System 1, which means it occurs 
automatically and fast. A marker of skilled performance is the ability to 
deal with vast amounts of information swiftly and efficiently. 

When a challenge is encountered to which a skilled response is 



available, that response is evoked. What happens in the absence of skill? 
Sometimes, as in the problem 17 * 24 = ?, which calls for a specific 
answer, it is immediately apparent that System 2 must be called in. But it is 
rare for System 1 to be dumbfounded. System 1 is not constrained by 
capacity limits and is profligate in its computations. When engaged in 
searching for an answer to one question, it simultaneously generates the 
answers to related questions, and it may substitute a response that more 
easily comes to mind for the one that was requested. In this conception of 
heu Septtedristies, the heuristic answer is not necessarily simpler or more 
frugal than the original question—it is only more accessible, computed 
more quickly and easily. The heuristic answers are not random, and they 
are often approximately correct. And sometimes they are quite wrong. 

System 1 registers the cognitive ease with which it processes 
information, but it does not generate a warning signal when it becomes 
unreliable. Intuitive answers come to mind quickly and confidently, whether 
they originate from skills or from heuristics. There is no simple way for 
System 2 to distinguish between a skilled and a heuristic response. Its only 
recourse is to slow down and attempt to construct an answer on its own, 
which it is reluctant to do because it is indolent. Many suggestions of 
System 1 are casually endorsed with minimal checking, as in the bat-and- 
ball problem. This is how System 1 acquires its bad reputation as the 
source of errors and biases. Its operative features, which include WYSIATI, 
intensity matching, and associative coherence, among others, give rise to 
predictable biases and to cognitive illusions such as anchoring, 
nonregressive predictions, overconfidence, and numerous others. 

What can be done about biases? How can we improve judgments and 
decisions, both our own and those of the institutions that we serve and that 
serve us? The short answer is that little can be achieved without a 
considerable investment of effort. As I know from experience, System 1 is 
not readily educable. Except for some effects that I attribute mostly to age, 
my intuitive thinking is just as prone to overconfidence, extreme 
predictions, and the planning fallacy as it was before I made a study of 
these issues. I have improved only in my ability to recognize situations in 
which errors are likely: “This number will be an anchor...,” “The decision 
could change if the problem is reframed...” And I have made much more 
progress in recognizing the errors of others than my own. 

The way to block errors that originate in System 1 is simple in principle: 
recognize the signs that you are in a cognitive minefield, slow down, and 
ask for reinforcement from System 2. This is how you will proceed when 
you next encounter the Muiler-Lyer illusion. When you see lines with fins 
pointing in different directions, you will recognize the situation as one in 



which you should not trust your impressions of length. Unfortunately, this 
sensible procedure is least likely to be applied when it is needed most. 
We would all like to have a warning bell that rings loudly whenever we are 
about to make a serious error, but no such bell is available, and cognitive 
illusions are generally more difficult to recognize than perceptual illusions. 
The voice of reason may be much fainter than the loud and clear voice of 
an erroneous intuition, and questioning your intuitions is unpleasant when 
you face the stress of a big decision. More doubt is the last thing you want 
when you are in trouble. The upshot is that it is much easier to identify a 
minefield when you observe others wandering into it than when you are 
about to do so. Observers are less cognitively busy and more open to 
information than actors. That was my reason for writing a book that is 
oriented to critics and gossipers rather than to decision makers. 

Organizations are better than individuals when it comes to avoiding 
errors, because they naturally think more slowly and have the power to 
impose orderly procedures. Organizations can institute and enforce the 
application of useful checklists, as well as more elaborate exercises, such 
as reference-class forecasting and the premortem. At least in part by 
providing a distinctive vocabulary, organizations can also encourage a 
culture in which people watch out for one another as they approach 
minefields. Whatever else it produces, a St pof othersn organization is a 
factory that manufactures judgments and decisions. Every factory must 
have ways to ensure the quality of its products in the initial design, in 
fabrication, and in final inspections. The corresponding stages in the 
production of decisions are the framing of the problem that is to be solved, 
the collection of relevant information leading to a decision, and reflection 
and review. An organization that seeks to improve its decision product 
should routinely look for efficiency improvements at each of these stages. 
The operative concept is routine. Constant quality control is an alternative 
to the wholesale reviews of processes that organizations commonly 
undertake in the wake of disasters. There is much to be done to improve 
decision making. One example out of many is the remarkable absence of 
systematic training for the essential skill of conducting efficient meetings. 

Ultimately, a richer language is essential to the skill of constructive 
criticism. Much like medicine, the identification of judgment errors is a 
diagnostic task, which requires a precise vocabulary. The name of a 
disease is a hook to which all that is known about the disease is attached, 
including vulnerabilities, environmental factors, symptoms, prognosis, and 
care. Similarly, labels such as “anchoring effects,” “narrow framing,” or 
“excessive coherence” bring together in memory everything we know about 
a bias, its causes, its effects, and what can be done about it. 

There is a direct link from more precise gossip at the watercooler to 



better decisions. Decision makers are sometimes better able to imagine 
the voices of present gossipers and future critics than to hear the hesitant 
voice of their own doubts. They will make better choices when they trust 
their critics to be sophisticated and fair, and when they expect their 
decision to be judged by how it was made, not only by how it turned out. 



Appendix A: Judgment Under Uncertainty: 

* 

Heuristics and Biases - 


Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman 

Many decisions are based on beliefs concerning the likelihood of uncertain 
events such as the outcome of an election, the guilt of a defendant, or the 
future value of the dollar. These beliefs are usually expressed in statements 
such as “I think that...,” “chances are...,” “it is unlikely that...,” and so forth. 
Occasionally, beliefs concerning uncertain events are expressed in 
numerical form as odds or subjective probabilities. What determines such 
beliefs? How do people assess the probability of an uncertain event or the 
value of an uncertain quantity? This article shows that people rely on a 
limited number of heuristic principles which reduce the complex tasks of 
assessing probabilities and predicting values to simpler judgmental 
operations. In general, these heuristics are quite useful, but sometimes 
they lead to severe and systematic errors. 

The subjective assessment of probability resembles the subjective 
assessment of physical quantities such as distance or size. These 
judgments are all based on data of limited validity, which are processed 
according to heuristic rules. For example, the apparent distance of an 
object is determined in part by its clarity. The more sharply the object is 
seen, the closer it appears to be. This rule has some validity, because in 
any given scene the more distant objects are seen less sharply than Vt 
pofreak/&gt;stimated when visibility is good because the objects are seen 
sharply. Thus, the reliance on clarity as an indication of distance leads to 
common biases. Such biases are also found in the intuitive judgment of 
probability. This article describes three heuristics that are employed to 
assess probabilities and to predict values. Biases to which these 
heuristics lead are enumerated, and the applied and theoretical 
implications of these observations are discussed. 

Representativeness 

Many of the probabilistic questions with which people are concerned 
belong to one of the following types: What is the probability that object A 
belongs to class B? What is the probability that event A originates from 


process B? What is the probability that process B will generate event A? In 
answering such questions, people typically rely on the representativeness 
heuristic, in which probabilities are evaluated by the degree to which A is 
representative of B, that is, by the degree to which A resembles B. For 
example, when A is highly representative of B, the probability that A 
originates from B is judged to be high. On the other hand, if A is not similar 
to B, the probability that A originates from B is judged to be low. 

For an illustration of judgment by representativeness, consider an 
individual who has been described by a former neighbor as follows: “Steve 
is very shy and withdrawn, invariably helpful, but with little interest in people, 
or in the world of reality. A meek and tidy soul, he has a need for order and 
structure, and a passion for detail.” How do people assess the probability 
that Steve is engaged in a particular occupation from a list of possibilities 
(for example, farmer, salesman, airline pilot, librarian, or physician)? How 
do people order these occupations from most to least likely? In the 
representativeness heuristic, the probability that Steve is a librarian, for 
example, is assessed by the degree to which he is representative of, or 
similar to, the stereotype of a librarian. Indeed, research with problems of 
this type has shown that people order the occupations by probability and 
by similarity in exactly the same way.- This approach to the judgment of 
probability leads to serious errors, because similarity, or 
representativeness, is not influenced by several factors that should affect 
judgments of probability. 

Insensitivity to prior probability of outcomes. One of the factors that 
have no effect on representativeness but should have a major effect on 
probability is the prior probability, or base rate frequency, of the outcomes. 
In the case of Steve, for example, the fact that there are many more 
farmers than librarians in the population should enter into any reasonable 
estimate of the probability that Steve is a librarian rather than a farmer. 
Considerations of base-rate frequency, however, do not affect the 
similarity of Steve to the stereotypes of librarians and farmers. If people 
evaluate probability by representativeness, therefore, prior probabilities 
will be neglected. This hypothesis was tested in an experiment where prior 
probabilities were manipulated.- Subjects were shown brief personality 
descriptions of several individuals, allegedly sampled at random from a 
group of 100 professionals—engineers and lawyers. The subjects were 
asked to assess, for each description, the probability that it belonged to an 
engineer rather than to a lawy [hanerser. In one experimental condition, 
subjects were told that the group from which the descriptions had been 
drawn consisted of 70 engineers and 30 lawyers. In another condition, 
subjects were told that the group consisted of 30 engineers and 70 


lawyers. The odds that any particular description belongs to an engineer 
rather than to a lawyer should be higher in the first condition, where there is 
a majority of engineers, than in the second condition, where there is a 
majority of lawyers. Specifically, it can be shown by applying Bayes’ rule 
that the ratio of these odds should be (.7/.3) 2 , or 5.44, for each description. 
In a sharp violation of Bayes’ rule, the subjects in the two conditions 
produced essentially the same probability judgments. Apparently, subjects 
evaluated the likelihood that a particular description belonged to an 
engineer rather than to a lawyer by the degree to which this description 
was representative of the two stereotypes, with little or no regard for the 
prior probabilities of the categories. 

The subjects used prior probabilities correctly when they had no other 
information. In the absence of a personality sketch, they judged the 
probability that an unknown individual is an engineer to be .7 and .3, 
respectively, in the two base-rate conditions. However, prior probabilities 
were effectively ignored when a description was introduced, even when 
this description was totally uninformative. The responses to the following 
description illustrate this phenomenon: 

Dick is a 30-year-old man. He is married with no children. A man 
of high ability and high motivation, he promises to be quite 
successful in his field. He is well liked by his colleagues. 

This description was intended to convey no information relevant to the 
question of whether Dick is an engineer or a lawyer. Consequently, the 
probability that Dick is an engineer should equal the proportion of 
engineers in the group, as if no description had been given. The subjects, 
however, judged the probability of Dick being an engineer to be .5 
regardless of whether the stated proportion of engineers in the group was 
.7 or .3. Evidently, people respond differently when given no evidence and 
when given worthless evidence. When no specific evidence is given, prior 
probabilities are properly utilized; when worthless evidence is given, prior 
probabilities are ignored.- 

Insensitivity to sample size. To evaluate the probability of obtaining a 
particular result in a sample drawn from a specified population, people 
typically apply the representativeness heuristic. That is, they assess the 
likelihood of a sample result, for example, that the average height in a 
random sample often men will be 6 feet, by the similarity of this result to the 
corresponding parameter (that is, to the average height in the population of 
men). The similarity of a sample statistic to a population parameter does 
not depend on the size of the sample. Consequently, if probabilities are 


assessed by representativeness, then the judged probability of a sample 
statistic will be essentially independent of sample size. Indeed, when 
subjects assessed the distributions of average height for samples of 
various sizes, they produced identical distributions. For example, the 
probability of obtaining an average height greater than 6 feet was 
assigned the same value for samples of 1,000, 100, and 10 men.- 
Moreover, subjects failed to appreciate the role of sample size even when 
it was emphasized in the formulation of the problem. Consider the 
following question: 

A certain town is s [ainquote wierved by two hospitals. In the 
larger hospital about 45 babies are born each day, and in the 
smaller hospital about 15 babies are born each day. As you 
know, about 50% of all babies are boys. However, the exact 
percentage varies from day to day. 

Sometimes it may be higher than 50%, sometimes lower. 

For a period of 1 year, each hospital recorded the days on 
which more than 60% of the babies born were boys. Which 
hospital do you think recorded more such days? 

The larger hospital (21) 

The smaller hospital (21) 

About the same (that is, within 5% of each other) (53) 

The values in parentheses are the number of undergraduate students who 
chose each answer. 

Most subjects judged the probability of obtaining more than 60% boys to 
be the same in the small and in the large hospital, presumably because 
these events are described by the same statistic and are therefore equally 
representative of the general population. In contrast, sampling theory 
entails that the expected number of days on which more than 60% of the 
babies are boys is much greater in the small hospital than in the large one, 
because a large sample is less likely to stray from 50%. This fundamental 
notion of statistics is evidently not part of people’s repertoire of intuitions. 

A similar insensitivity to sample size has been reported in judgments of 
posterior probability, that is, of the probability that a sample has been 
drawn from one population rather than from another. Consider the following 
example: 


Imagine an urn filled with balls, of which 2/3 are of one color and 
1/3 of another. One individual has drawn 5 balls from the urn, and 
found that 4 were red and 1 was white. Another individual has 
drawn 20 balls and found that 12 were red and 8 were white. 


Which of the two individuals should feel more confident that the 
urn contains 2/3 red balls and 1/3 white balls, rather than the 
opposite? What odds should each individual give? 

In this problem, the correct posterior odds are 8 to 1 for the 4:1 sample 
and 16 to 1 for the 12:8 sample, assuming equal prior probabilities. 
However, most people feel that the first sample provides much stronger 
evidence for the hypothesis that the urn is predominantly red, because the 
proportion of red balls is larger in the first than in the second sample. Here 
again, intuitive judgments are dominated by the sample proportion and are 
essentially unaffected by the size of the sample, which plays a crucial role 
in the determination of the actual posterior odds/ In addition, intuitive 
estimates of posterior odds are far less extreme than the correct values. 
The underestimation of the impact of evidence has been observed 
repeatedly in problems of this type/ It has been labeled “conservatism.” 

Misconceptions of chance. People expect that a sequence of events 
generated by a random process will represent the essential characteristics 
of that process even when the sequence is short. In considering tosses of 
a coin for heads or tails, for example, people regard the sequence H-T-H- 
T-T-H to be more likely than the sequence H-H-H-T- [enc. U-T, which does 
not appear random, and also more likely than the sequence H-H-H-H-T-H, 
which does not represent the fairness of the coin/ Thus, people expect 
that the essential characteristics of the process will be represented, not 
only globally in the entire sequence, but also locally in each of its parts. A 
locally representative sequence, however, deviates systematically from 
chance expectation: it contains too many alternations and too few runs. 
Another consequence of the belief in local representativeness is the well- 
known gambler’s fallacy. After observing a long run of red on the roulette 
wheel, for example, most people erroneously believe that black is now due, 
presumably because the occurrence of black will result in a more 
representative sequence than the occurrence of an additional red. Chance 
is commonly viewed as a self-correcting process in which a deviation in 
one direction induces a deviation in the opposite direction to restore the 
equilibrium. In fact, deviations are not “corrected” as a chance process 
unfolds, they are merely diluted. 

Misconceptions of chance are not limited to naive subjects. A study of 
the statistical intuitions of experienced research psychologists^ revealed a 
lingering belief in what may be called the “law of small numbers,” according 
to which even small samples are highly representative of the populations 
from which they are drawn. The responses of these investigators reflected 
the expectation that a valid hypothesis about a population will be 


represented by a statistically significant result in a sample with little regard 
for its size. As a consequence, the researchers put too much faith in the 
results of small samples and grossly overestimated the replicability of such 
results. In the actual conduct of research, this bias leads to the selection of 
samples of inadequate size and to overinterpretation of findings. 

Insensitivity to predictability. People are sometimes called upon to 
make such numerical predictions as the future value of a stock, the 
demand for a commodity, or the outcome of a football game. Such 
predictions are often made by representativeness. For example, suppose 
one is given a description of a company and is asked to predict its future 
profit. If the description of the company is very favorable, a very high profit 
will appear most representative of that description; if the description is 
mediocre, a mediocre performance will appear most representative. The 
degree to which the description is favorable is unaffected by the reliability 
of that description or by the degree to which it permits accurate prediction. 
Hence, if people predict solely in terms of the favorableness of the 
description, their predictions will be insensitive to the reliability of the 
evidence and to the expected accuracy of the prediction. 

This mode of judgment violates the normative statistical theory in which 
the extremeness and the range of predictions are controlled by 
considerations of predictability. When predictability is nil, the same 
prediction should be made in all cases. For example, if the descriptions of 
companies provide no information relevant to profit, then the same value 
(such as average profit) should be predicted for all companies. If 
predictability is perfect, of course, the values predicted will match the 
actual values and the range of predictions will equal the range of 
outcomes. In general, the higher the predictability, the wider the range of 
predicted values. 

Several studies of numerical prediction have demonstrated that intuitive 
predictions violate this rule, and that subjects show little or no regard for 
considerations of predictability.^ In one o [pand tf these studies, subjects 
were presented with several paragraphs, each describing the performance 
of a student teacher during a particular practice lesson. Some subjects 
were asked to evaluate the quality of the lesson described in the 
paragraph in percentile scores, relative to a specified population. Other 
subjects were asked to predict, also in percentile scores, the standing of 
each student teacher 5 years after the practice lesson. The judgments 
made under the two conditions were identical. That is, the prediction of a 
remote criterion (success of a teacher after 5 years) was identical to the 
evaluation of the information on which the prediction was based (the quality 
of the practice lesson). The students who made these predictions were 


undoubtedly aware of the limited predictability of teaching competence on 
the basis of a single trial lesson 5 years earlier; nevertheless, their 
predictions were as extreme as their evaluations. 

The illusion of validity. As we have seen, people often predict by 
selecting the outcome (for example, an occupation) that is most 
representative of the input (for example, the description of a person). The 
confidence they have in their prediction depends primarily on the degree of 
representativeness (that is, on the quality of the match between the 
selected outcome and the input) with little or no regard for the factors that 
limit predictive accuracy. Thus, people express great confidence in the 
prediction that a person is a librarian when given a description of his 
personality which matches the stereotype of librarians, even if the 
description is scanty, unreliable, or outdated. The unwarranted confidence 
which is produced by a good fit between the predicted outcome and the 
input information may be called the illusion of validity. This illusion persists 
even when the judge is aware of the factors that limit the accuracy of his 
predictions. It is a common observation that psychologists who conduct 
selection interviews often experience considerable confidence in their 
predictions, even when they know of the vast literature that shows selection 
interviews to be highly fallible. The continued reliance on the clinical 
interview for selection, despite repeated demonstrations of its inadequacy, 
amply attests to the strength of this effect. 

The internal consistency of a pattern of inputs is a major determinant of 
one's confidence in predictions based on these inputs. For example, 
people express more confidence in predicting the final grade point 
average of a student whose first-year record consists entirely of B’s than in 
predicting the grade point average of a student whose first-year record 
includes many A’s and C’s. Highly consistent patterns are most often 
observed when the input variables are highly redundant or correlated. 
Hence, people tend to have great confidence in predictions based on 
redundant input variables. However, an elementary result in the statistics of 
correlation asserts that, given input variables of stated validity, a prediction 
based on several such inputs can achieve higher accuracy when they are 
independent of each other than when they are redundant or correlated. 
Thus, redundancy among inputs decreases accuracy even as it increases 
confidence, and people are often confident in predictions that are quite 
likely to be off the mark.— 

Misconceptions of regression. Suppose a large group of children has 
been examined on two equivalent versions of an aptitude test. If one 
selects ten children from among those who did best on one of the two 
versions, he will usually find their performance on the second version to be 


somewhat disappointing. Conversely, if one selects ten children from 
among those who did worst on one version, they will be found, on the 
average, to do somewhat better on the other version. Mo [r vs tre generally 
consider two variables X and Y which have the same distribution. If one 
selects individuals whose average Xscore deviates from the mean of X by 
k units, then the average of their Y scores will usually deviate from the 
mean of Y by less than k units. These observations illustrate a general 
phenomenon known as regression toward the mean, which was first 
documented by Galton more than 100 years ago. 

In the normal course of life, one encounters many instances of 
regression toward the mean, in the comparison of the height of fathers and 
sons, of the intelligence of husbands and wives, or of the performance of 
individuals on consecutive examinations. Nevertheless, people do not 
develop correct intuitions about this phenomenon. First, they do not expect 
regression in many contexts where it is bound to occur. Second, when they 
recognize the occurrence of regression, they often invent spurious causal 
explanations for it.— We suggest that the phenomenon of regression 
remains elusive because it is incompatible with the belief that the 
predicted outcome should be maximally representative of the input, and, 
hence, that the value of the outcome variable should be as extreme as the 
value of the input variable. 

The failure to recognize the import of regression can have pernicious 
consequences, as illustrated by the following observation.— In a 
discussion of flight training, experienced instructors noted that praise for 
an exceptionally smooth landing is typically followed by a poorer landing on 
the next try, while harsh criticism after a rough landing is usually followed by 
an improvement on the next try. The instructors concluded that verbal 
rewards are detrimental to learning, while verbal punishments are 
beneficial, contrary to accepted psychological doctrine. This conclusion is 
unwarranted because of the presence of regression toward the mean. As 
in other cases of repeated examination, an improvement will usually follow 
a poor performance and a deterioration will usually follow an outstanding 
performance, even if the instructor does not respond to the trainee’s 
achievement on the first attempt. Because the instructors had praised their 
trainees after good landings and admonished them after poor ones, they 
reached the erroneous and potentially harmful conclusion that punishment 
is more effective than reward. 

Thus, the failure to understand the effect of regression leads one to 
overestimate the effectiveness of punishment and to underestimate the 
effectiveness of reward. In social interaction, as well as in training, rewards 
are typically administered when performance is good, and punishments 


are typically administered when performance is poor. By regression alone, 
therefore, behavior is most likely to improve after punishment and most 
likely to deteriorate after reward. Consequently, the human condition is 
such that, by chance alone, one is most often rewarded for punishing 
others and most often punished for rewarding them. People are generally 
not aware of this contingency. In fact, the elusive role of regression in 
determining the apparent consequences of reward and punishment seems 
to have escaped the notice of students of this area. 

Availability 

There are situations in which people assess the frequency of a class or the 
probability of an event by the ease with which instances or occurrences 
can be brought to mind. For example, one may assess the risk of heart 
attack among middle-aged people by recalling such occurrences a 
[occpunishmentmong one’s acquaintances. Similarly, one may evaluate 
the probability that a given business venture will fail by imagining various 
difficulties it could encounter. This judgmental heuristic is called availability. 
Availability is a useful clue for assessing frequency or probability, because 
instances of large classes are usually recalled better and faster than 
instances of less frequent classes. However, availability is affected by 
factors other than frequency and probability. Consequently, the reliance on 
availability leads to predictable biases, some of which are illustrated 
below. 

Biases due to the retrievalIity of instances. When the size of a class is 
judged by the availability of its instances, a class whose instances are 
easily retrieved will appear more numerous than a class of equal frequency 
whose instances are less retrievable. In an elementary demonstration of 
this effect, subjects heard a list of well-known personalities of both sexes 
and were subsequently asked to judge whether the list contained more 
names of men than of women. Different lists were presented to different 
groups of subjects. In some of the lists the men were relatively more 
famous than the women, and in others the women were relatively more 
famous than the men. In each of the lists, the subjects erroneously judged 
that the class (sex) that had the more famous personalities was the more 
numerous.^ 

In addition to familiarity, there are other factors, such as salience, which 
affect the retrievability of instances. For example, the impact of seeing a 
house burning on the subjective probability of such accidents is probably 
greater than the impact of reading about a fire in the local paper. 
Furthermore, recent occurrences are likely to be relatively more available 


than earlier occurrences. It is a common experience that the subjective 
probability of traffic accidents rises temporarily when one sees a car 
overturned by the side of the road. 

Biases due to the effectiveness of a search set. Suppose one samples 
a word (of three letters or more) at random from an English text. Is it more 
likely that the word starts with r or that r is the third letter? People approach 
this problem by recalling words that begin with r(road) and words that have 
rin the third position (car) and assess the relative frequency by the ease 
with which words of the two types come to mind. Because it is much easier 
to search for words by their first letter than by their third letter, most people 
judge words that begin with a given consonant to be more numerous than 
words in which the same consonant appears in the third position. They do 
so even for consonants, such as r or k, that are more frequent in the third 
position than in the first.— 

Different tasks elicit different search sets. For example, suppose you 
are asked to rate the frequency with which abstract words ( thought , love) 
and concrete words (door, water) appear in written English. A natural way 
to answer this question is to search for contexts in which the word could 
appear. It seems easier to think of contexts in which an abstract concept is 
mentioned (love in love stories) than to think of contexts in which a 
concrete word (such as door) is mentioned. If the frequency of words is 
judged by the availability of the contexts in which they appear, abstract 
words will be judged as relatively more numerous than concrete words. 
This bias has been observed in a recent study^ which showed that the 
judged frequency of occurrence of abstract words was much higher than 
that of concrete words, equated in objective frequency. Abstract words 
were also judged to appear in a much greater variety of contexts than 
concrete words. 

Biases of imaginability. Sometimes one has to assess the frequency of 
a class whose instances are not stored in memory but can be generated 
according to a given rule. In such situations, one typically generates 
several instances and evaluates frequency or probability by the ease with 
which the relevant instances can be constructed. However, the ease of 
constructing instances does not always reflect their actual frequency, and 
this mode of evaluation is prone to biases. To illustrate, consider a group 
of 10 people who form committees of k members, 2 =k= 8. How many 
different committees of k members can be formed? The correct answer to 
this problem is given by the binomial coefficient (10//c) which reaches a 
maximum of 252 for k= 5. Clearly, the number of committees of k members 
equals the number of committees of (10 -k) members, because any 
committee of k members defines a unique group of (10 - k) nonmembers. 


One way to answer this question without computation is to mentally 
construct committees of k members and to evaluate their number by the 
ease with which they come to mind. Committees of few members, say 2, 
are more available than committees of many members, say 8. The 
simplest scheme for the construction of committees is a partition of the 
group into disjoint sets. One readily sees that it is easy to construct five 
disjoint committees of 2 members, while it is impossible to generate even 
two disjoint committees of 8 members. Consequently, if frequency is 
assessed by imaginability, or by availability for construction, the small 
committees will appear more numerous than larger committees, in contrast 
to the correct bell-shaped function. Indeed, when naive subjects were 
asked to estimate the number of distinct committees of various sizes, their 
estimates were a decreasing monotonic function of committee size.^ For 
example, the median estimate of the number of committees of 2 members 
was 70, while the estimate for committees of 8 members was 20 (the 
correct answer is 45 in both cases). 

Imaginability plays an important role in the evaluation of probabilities in 
real-life situations. The risk involved in an adventurous expedition, for 
example, is evaluated by imagining contingencies with which the 
expedition is not equipped to cope. If many such difficulties are vividly 
portrayed, the expedition can be made to appear exceedingly dangerous, 
although the ease with which disasters are imagined need not reflect their 
actual likelihood. Conversely, the risk involved in an undertaking may be 
grossly underestimated if some possible dangers are either difficult to 
conceive of, or simply do not come to mind. 

Illusory correlation. Chapman and Chapman^ have described an 
interesting bias in the judgment of the frequency with which two events co¬ 
occur. They presented naive judges with information concerning several 
hypothetical mental patients. The data for each patient consisted of a 
clinical diagnosis and a drawing of a person made by the patient. Later the 
judges estimated the frequency with which each diagnosis (such as 
paranoia or suspiciousness) had been accompanied by various features 
of the drawing (such as peculiar eyes). The subjects markedly 
overestimated the frequency of [ frpici co-occurrence of natural associates, 
such as suspiciousness and peculiar eyes. This effect was labeled illusory 
correlation. In their erroneous judgments of the data to which they had been 
exposed, naive subjects “rediscovered” much of the common, but 
unfounded, clinical lore concerning the interpretation of the draw-a-person 
test. The illusory correlation effect was extremely resistant to contradictory 
data. It persisted even when the correlation between symptom and 
diagnosis was actually negative, and it prevented the judges from 


detecting relationships that were in fact present. 

Availability provides a natural account for the illusory-correlation effect. 
The judgment of how frequently two events co-occur could be based on the 
strength of the associative bond between them. When the association is 
strong, one is likely to conclude that the events have been frequently 
paired. Consequently, strong associates will be judged to have occurred 
together frequently. According to this view, the illusory correlation between 
suspiciousness and peculiar drawing of the eyes, for example, is due to 
the fact that suspiciousness is more readily associated with the eyes than 
with any other part of the body. 

Lifelong experience has taught us that, in general, instances of large 
classes are recalled better and faster than instances of less frequent 
classes; that likely occurrences are easier to imagine than unlikely ones; 
and that the associative connections between events are strengthened 
when the events frequently co-occur. As a result, man has at his disposal a 
procedure (the availability heuristic) for estimating the numerosity of a 
class, the likelihood of an event, or the frequency of co-occurrences, by the 
ease with which the relevant mental operations of retrieval, construction, or 
association can be performed. However, as the preceding examples have 
demonstrated, this valuable estimation procedure results in systematic 
errors. 


Adjustment and Anchoring 

In many situations, people make estimates by starting from an initial value 
that is adjusted to yield the final answer. The initial value, or starting point, 
may be suggested by the formulation of the problem, or it may be the result 
of a partial computation. In either case, adjustments are typically 
insufficient.^ That is, different starting points yield different estimates, 
which are biased toward the initial values. We call this phenomenon 
anchoring. 

Insufficient adjustment. In a demonstration of the anchoring effect, 
subjects were asked to estimate various quantities, stated in percentages 
(for example, the percentage of African countries in the United Nations). 
For each quantity, a number between 0 and 100 was determined by 
spinning a wheel of fortune in the subjects’ presence. The subjects were 
instructed to indicate first whether that number was higher or lower than the 
value of the quantity, and then to estimate the value of the quantity by 
moving upward or downward from the given number. Different groups were 
given different numbers for each quantity, and these arbitrary numbers had 
a marked effect on estimates. For example, the median estimates of the 


percentage of African countries in the United Nations were 25 and 45 for 
groups that received 10 and 65, respectively, as starting points. Payoffs for 
accuracy did not reduce the anchoring effect. 

Anchoring occurs not only when the starting point is given to the subject, 
but also when the subject bases his estimate on the result of some 
incomplete computation. A study of intuitive numerical estimation illustrates 
this effect. Two groups of high school student [choult os estimated, within 5 
seconds, a numerical expression that was written on the blackboard. One 
group estimated the product 

8 x7 x6 x5 x4 x3 x2 xl 
while another group estimated the product 

1 x2 x3 x4 x5 x6 x7 x8 

To rapidly answer such questions, people may perform a few steps of 
computation and estimate the product by extrapolation or adjustment. 
Because adjustments are typically insufficient, this procedure should lead 
to underestimation. Furthermore, because the result of the first few steps of 
multiplication (performed from left to right) is higher in the descending 
sequence than in the ascending sequence, the former expression should 
be judged larger than the latter. Both predictions were confirmed. The 
median estimate for the ascending sequence was 512, while the median 
estimate for the descending sequence was 2,250. The correct answer is 
40,320. 

Biases in the evaluation of conjunctive and disjunctive events. In a 
recent study by Bar-Hilled subjects were given the opportunity to bet on 
one of two events. Three types of events were used: (i) simple events, such 
as drawing a red marble from a bag containing 50% red marbles and 50% 
white marbles; (ii) conjunctive events, such as drawing a red marble seven 
times in succession, with replacement, from a bag containing 90% red 
marbles and 10% white marbles; and (iii) disjunctive events, such as 
drawing a red marble at least once in seven successive tries, with 
replacement, from a bag containing 10% red marbles and 9% white 
marbles. In this problem, a significant majority of subjects preferred to bet 
on the conjunctive event (the probability of which is .48) rather than on the 
simple event (the probability of which is .50). Subjects also preferred to bet 
on the simple event rather than on the disjunctive event, which has a 
probability of .52. Thus, most subjects bet on the less likely event in both 
comparisons. This pattern of choices illustrates a general finding. Studies 
of choice among gambles and of judgments of probability indicate that 


people tend to overestimate the probability of conjunctive events— and to 
underestimate the probability of disjunctive events. These biases are 
readily explained as effects of anchoring. The stated probability of the 
elementary event (success at any one stage) provides a natural starting 
point for the estimation of the probabilities of both conjunctive and 
disjunctive events. Since adjustment from the starting point is typically 
insufficient, the final estimates remain too close to the probabilities of the 
elementary events in both cases. Note that the overall probability of a 
conjunctive event is lower than the probability of each elementary event, 
whereas the overall probability of a disjunctive event is higher than the 
probability of each elementary event. As a consequence of anchoring, the 
overall probability will be overestimated in conjunctive problems and 
underestimated in disjunctive problems. 

Biases in the evaluation of compound events are particularly significant 
in the context of planning. The successful completion of an undertaking, 
such as the development of a new product, typically has a conjunctive 
character: for the undertaking to succeed, each of a series of events must 
occur. Even when each of these events is very likely, the overall probability 
of success can be quite low if the number of events is large. The general 
tendency to overestimate the pr [timrall obability of conjunctive events 
leads to unwarranted optimism in the evaluation of the likelihood that a 
plan will succeed or that a project will be completed on time. Conversely, 
disjunctive structures are typically encountered in the evaluation of risks. A 
complex system, such as a nuclear reactor or a human body, will 
malfunction if any of its essential components fails. Even when the 
likelihood of failure in each component is slight, the probability of an overall 
failure can be high if many components are involved. Because of 
anchoring, people will tend to underestimate the probabilities of failure in 
complex systems. Thus, the direction of the anchoring bias can sometimes 
be inferred from the structure of the event. The chain-like structure of 
conjunctions leads to overestimation, the funnel-like structure of 
disjunctions leads to underestimation. 

Anchoring in the assessment of subjective probability distributions. In 
decision analysis, experts are often required to express their beliefs about 
a quantity, such as the value of the Dow Jones average on a particular day, 
in the form of a probability distribution. Such a distribution is usually 
constructed by asking the person to select values of the quantity that 
correspond to specified percentiles of his subjective probability 
distribution. For example, the judge may be asked to select a number, X 90 , 
such that his subjective probability that this number will be higher than the 
value of the Dow Jones average is .90. That is, he should select the value 


Xg 0 so that he is just willing to accept 9 to 1 odds that the Dow Jones 
average will not exceed it. A subjective probability distribution for the value 
of the Dow Jones average can be constructed from several such 
judgments corresponding to different percentiles. 

By collecting subjective probability distributions for many different 
quantities, it is possible to test the judge for proper calibration. A judge is 
properly (or externally) calibrated in a set of problems if exactly U%% of the 
true values of the assessed quantities falls below his stated values ofXII% 
. For example, the true values should fall below X 01 for 1% of the quantities 
and above X 99 for 1% of the quantities. Thus, the true values should fall in 
the confidence interval between X 0 i and X 99 on 98% of the problems. 

Several investigators^- have obtained probability distributions for many 
quantities from a large number of judges. These distributions indicated 
large and systematic departures from proper calibration. In most studies, 
the actual values of the assessed quantities are either smaller thanX 0 / or 
greater than X 99 for about 30% of the problems. That is, the subjects state 
overly narrow confidence intervals which reflect more certainty than is 
justified by their knowledge about the assessed quantities. This bias is 
common to naive and to sophisticated subjects, and it is not eliminated by 
introducing proper scoring rules, which provide incentives for external 
calibration. This effect is attributable, in part at least, to anchoring. 

To select X 90 for the value of the Dow Jones average, for example, it is 
natural to begin by thinking about one’s best estimate of the Dow Jones 
and to adjust this value upward. If this adjustment—like most others—is 
insufficient, thenX 99 will not be sufficiently extreme. A similar anchoring 
[lariciently effect will occur in the selection ofX^, which is presumably 
obtained by adjusting one’s best estimate downward. Consequently, the 
confidence interval between X 10 andX 90 will be too narrow, and the 
assessed probability distribution will be too tight. In support of this 
interpretation it can be shown that subjective probabilities are 
systematically altered by a procedure in which one’s best estimate does 
not serve as an anchor. 

Subjective probability distributions for a given quantity (the Dow Jones 
average) can be obtained in two different ways: (i) by asking the subject to 
select values of the Dow Jones that correspond to specified percentiles of 
his probability distribution and (ii) by asking the subject to assess the 
probabilities that the true value of the Dow Jones will exceed some 
specified values. The two procedures are formally equivalent and should 
yield identical distributions. However, they suggest different modes of 


adjustment from different anchors. In procedure (i), the natural starting point 
is one’s best estimate of the quantity. In procedure (ii), on the other hand, 
the subject may be anchored on the value stated in the question. 
Alternatively, he may be anchored on even odds, or a 50-50 chance, 
which is a natural starting point in the estimation of likelihood. In either 
case, procedure (ii) should yield less extreme odds than procedure (i). 

To contrast the two procedures, a set of 24 quantities (such as the air 
distance from New Delhi to Peking) was presented to a group of subjects 
who assessed either X 10 orX 90 for each problem. Another group of 
subjects received the median judgment of the first group for each of the 24 
quantities. They were asked to assess the odds that each of the given 
values exceeded the true value of the relevant quantity. In the absence of 
any bias, the second group should retrieve the odds specified to the first 
group, that is, 9:1. However, if even odds or the stated value serve as 
anchors, the odds of the second group should be less extreme, that is, 
closer to 1:1. Indeed, the median odds stated by this group, across all 
problems, were 3:1. When the judgments of the two groups were tested for 
external calibration, it was found that subjects in the first group were too 
extreme, in accord with earlier studies. The events that they defined as 
having a probability of .10 actually obtained in 24% of the cases. In 
contrast, subjects in the second group were too conservative. Events to 
which they assigned an average probability of .34 actually obtained in 26% 
of the cases. These results illustrate the manner in which the degree of 
calibration depends on the procedure of elicitation. 

Discussion 

This article has been concerned with cognitive biases that stem from th
e 
reliance on judgmental heuristics. These biases are not attributable to 
motivational effects such as wishful thinking or the distortion of judgments 
by payoffs and penalties. Indeed, several of the severe errors of judgment 
reported earlier occurred despite the fact that subjects were encouraged 
to be accurate and were rewarded for the correct answers.^ 

The reliance on heuristics and the prevalence of biases are not 
restricted to laymen. Experienced researchers are also prone to the same 
biases—when they think intuitively. For example, the tendency to predict 
the outcome that best represents the data, with insufficient regard for prior 
probability, has been observed in the intuitive judgments of individuals who 
have had extensive training in statistics, [ticor pri^ Although the 
statistically sophisticated avoid elementary errors, such as the gambler’s 
fallacy, their intuitive judgments are liable to similar fallacies in more 


intricate and less transparent problems. 

It is not surprising that useful heuristics such as representativeness and 
availability are retained, even though they occasionally lead to errors in 
prediction or estimation. What is perhaps surprising is the failure of people 
to infer from lifelong experience such fundamental statistical rules as 
regression toward the mean, or the effect of sample size on sampling 
variability. Although everyone is exposed, in the normal course of life, to 
numerous examples from which these rules could have been induced, very 
few people discover the principles of sampling and regression on their 
own. Statistical principles are not learned from everyday experience 
because the relevant instances are not coded appropriately. For example, 
people do not discover that successive lines in a text differ more in 
average word length than do successive pages, because they simply do 
not attend to the average word length of individual lines or pages. Thus, 
people do not learn the relation between sample size and sampling 
variability, although the data for such learning are abundant. 

The lack of an appropriate code also explains why people usually do not 
detect the biases in their judgments of probability. A person could 
conceivably learn whether his judgments are externally calibrated by 
keeping a tally of the proportion of events that actually occur among those 
to which he assigns the same probability. However, it is not natural to 
group events by their judged probability. In the absence of such grouping it 
is impossible for an individual to discover, for example, that only 50% of 
the predictions to which he has assigned a probability of .9 or higher 
actually came true. 

The empirical analysis of cognitive biases has implications for the 
theoretical and applied role of judged probabilities. Modem decision 
theory^ regards subjective probability as the quantified opinion of an 
idealized person. Specifically, the subjective probability of a given event is 
defined by the set of bets about this event that such a person is willing to 
accept. An internally consistent, or coherent, subjective probability 
measure can be derived for an individual if his choices among bets satisfy 
certain principles, that is, the axioms of the theory. The derived probability 
is subjective in the sense that different individuals are allowed to have 
different probabilities for the same event. The major contribution of this 
approach is that it provides a rigorous subjective interpretation of 
probability that is applicable to unique events and is embedded in a 
general theory of rational decision. 

It should perhaps be noted that, while subjective probabilities can 
sometimes be inferred from preferences among bets, they are normally not 
formed in this fashion. A person bets on team A rather than on team B 


because he believes that team A is more likely to win; he does not infer 
this belief from his betting preferences. Thus, in reality, subjective 
probabilities determine preferences among bets and are not derived from 
them, as in the axiomatic theory of rational decision.— 

The inherently subjective nature of probability has led many students to 
the belief that coherence, or internal consistency, is the only valid criterion 
by which judged probabilities should be evaluated. From the standpoint of 
the formal theory of subjective probability, any set of internally consistent 
probability judgments is as good as any other. This criterion is not entirely 
satisfactory [ saf sub, because an internally consistent set of subjective 
probabilities can be incompatible with other beliefs held by the individual. 
Consider a person whose subjective probabilities for all possible 
outcomes of a coin-tossing game reflect the gambler’s fallacy. That is, his 
estimate of the probability of tails on a particular toss increases with the 
number of consecutive heads that preceded that toss. The judgments of 
such a person could be internally consistent and therefore acceptable as 
adequate subjective probabilities according to the criterion of the formal 
theory. These probabilities, however, are incompatible with the generally 
held belief that a coin has no memory and is therefore incapable of 
generating sequential dependencies. For judged probabilities to be 
considered adequate, or rational, internal consistency is not enough. The 
judgments must be compatible with the entire web of beliefs held by the 
individual. Unfortunately, there can be no simple formal procedure for 
assessing the compatibility of a set of probability judgments with the 
judge’s total system of beliefs. The rational judge will nevertheless strive for 
compatibility, even though internal consistency is more easily achieved 
and assessed. In particular, he will attempt to make his probability 
judgments compatible with his knowledge about the subject matter, the 
laws of probability, and his own judgmental heuristics and biases. 

Summary 

This article described three heuristics that are employed in making 
judgments under uncertainty: (i) representativeness, which is usually 
employed when people are asked to judge the probability that an object or 
event A belongs to class or process B; (ii) availability of instances or 
scenarios, which is often employed when people are asked to assess the 
frequency of a class or the plausibility of a particular development; and (iii) 
adjustment from an anchor, which is usually employed in numerical 
prediction when a relevant value is available. These heuristics are highly 
economical and usually effective, but they lead to systematic and 


predictable errors. A better understanding of these heuristics and of the 
biases to which they lead could improve judgments and decisions in 
situations of uncertainty. 



Notes 


1 . 

D. Kahneman and A. Tversky, “On the Psychology of Prediction,” 
Psychological ReviewQO (1973): 237-51. 

Z 

Ibid. 

Z 

Ibid. 

4. 

D. Kahneman and A. Tversky, “Subjective Probability: A Judgment of 
Representativeness,” Cognitive Psychology 3 (1972): 430-54. 

Z 

Ibid. 

6 . 

W. Edwards, “Conservatism in Human Information Processing,” in 
Formal Representation of Human Judgment, ed. B. Kleinmuntz (New 
York: Wiley, 1968), 17-52. 

[t="orm 

L 

Kahneman and Tversky, “Subjective Probability.” 

Z 

A. Tversky and D. Kahneman, “Belief in the Law of Small Numbers,” 
Psychological Bulletin 76 (1971): 105-10. 

Z 

Kahneman and Tversky, “On the Psychology of Prediction.” 

10 . 

Ibid. 

11 . 

Ibid. 

12 . 

Ibid. 

13. 

A. Tversky and D. Kahneman, “Availability: A Heuristic for Judging 
Frequency and Probability,” Cognitive Psychology 5 (1973): 207-32. 

14. 

Ibid. 

15. 


R. C. Galbraith and B. J. Underwood, “Perceived Frequency of 
Concrete and Abstract Words,” Memory &amp; Cognition 1 (1973): 56-60. 

16. 

Tverskyand Kahneman, “Availability." 

17. 

L. J. Chapman and J. P. Chapman, “Genesis of Popular but 
Erroneous Psychodiagnostic Observations,” Journal of Abnormal 
Psychology 73 (1967): 193-204; L. J. Chapman and J. P. Chapman, 
“Illusory Correlation as an Obstacle to the Use of Valid Psychodiagnostic 
Signs,” Journal of Abnormal Psychology 74 (1969): 271-80. 

18. 

P. Slovic and S. Lichtenstein, “Comparison of Bayesian and 
Regression Approaches to the Study of Information Processing in 
Judgment,” Organizational Behavior &amp; Human Performance 6 (1971): 
649-744. 

19. 

M. Bar-Hillel, “On the Subjective Probability of Compound Events,” 
Organizational Behavior &amp; Human Performance 9 (1973): 396-406. 

20 . 

J. Cohen, E. I. Chesnick, and D. Haran, “A Confirmation of the Inertial- 
? Effect in Sequential Choice and Decision,” British Journal of 
Psychology 63 (1972): 41-46. 

21 . 

M. Alpe [spa 

Acta Psychologica 35 (1971): 478-94; R. L. Winkler, “The 
Assessment of Prior Distributions in Bayesian Analysis,” Journal of the 
American Statistical Association 62 (1967): 776-800. 

22 . 

Kahneman and Tversky, “Subjective Probability”; Tversky and 
Kahneman, “Availability.” 

23. 

Kahneman and Tversky, “On the Psychology of Prediction”; Tversky 
and Kahneman, “Belief in the Law of Small Numbers.” 

24. 

L. J. Savage, The Foundations of Statistics (New York: Wiley, 1954). 

25. 

Ibid.; B. de Finetti, “Probability: Interpretations,” in International 
Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences, ed. D. E. Sills, vol. 12 (New \t&gt;rk: 
Macmillan, 1968), 496-505. 


Appendix B: Choices, Values, And Frames 

Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky 

ABSTRACT: We discuss the cognitive and the psychophysical 
determinants of choice in risky and riskless contexts. The psychophysics 
of value induce risk aversion in the domain of gains and risk seeking in 
the domain of losses. The psychophysics of chance induce 
overweighting of sure things and of improbable events, relative to events 
of moderate probability. Decision problems can be described or framed 
in multiple ways that give rise to different preferences, contrary to the 
invariance criterion of rational choice. The process of mental accounting, 
in which people organize the outcomes of transactions, explains some 
anomalies of consumer behavior. In particular, the acceptability of an 
option can depend on whether a negative outcome is evaluated as a cost 
or as an uncompensated loss. The relation between decision values and 
experience values is discussed. 


Making decisions is like speaking prose—people do it all the time, 
knowingly or unknowingly. It is hardly surprising, then, that the topic of 
decision making is shared by many disciplines, from mathematics and 
statistics, through economics and political science, to sociology and 
psychology. The study of decisions addresses both normative and 
descriptive questions. The normative analysis is concerned with the nature 
of rationality and the logic of decision making. The descriptive analysis, in 
contrast, is concerned with people's beliefs and preferences as they are, 
not as they should be. The tension between normative and descriptive 
considerations characterizes much of the study of judgment and choice. 

Analyses of decision making commonly distinguish risky and riskless 
choices. The paradigmatic example of decision un A v&gt; 

Risky Choice 

Risky choices, such as whether or not to take an umbrella and whether or 
not to go to war, are made without advance knowledge of their 
consequences. Because the consequences of such actions depend on 


uncertain events such as the weather or the opponent’s resolve, the choice 
of an act may be construed as the acceptance of a gamble that can yield 
various outcomes with different probabilities. It is therefore natural that the 
study of decision making under risk has focused on choices between 
simple gambles with monetary outcomes and specified probabilities, in 
the hope that these simple problems will reveal basic attitudes toward risk 
and value. 

We shall sketch an approach to risky choice that derives many of its 
hypotheses from a psychophysical analysis of responses to money and to 
probability. The psychophysical approach to decision making can be 
traced to a remarkable essay that Daniel Bernoulli published in 1738 
(Bernoulli 1954) in which he attempted to explain why people are generally 
averse to risk and why risk aversion decreases with increasing wealth. To 
illustrate risk aversion and Bernoulli’s analysis, consider the choice 
between a prospect that offers an 85% chance to win $1,000 (with a 15% 
chance to win nothing) and the alternative of receiving $800 for sure. A 
large majority of people prefer the sure thing over the gamble, although the 
gamble has higher (mathematical) expectation. The expectation of a 
monetary gamble is a weighted average, where each possible outcome is 
weighted by its probability of occurrence. The expectation of the gamble in 
this example is .85 * $1,000 + .15 * $0 = $850, which exceeds the 
expectation of $800 associated with the sure thing. The preference for the 
sure gain is an instance of risk aversion. In general, a preference for a sure 
outcome over a gamble that has higher or equal expectation is called risk 
averse, and the rejection of a sure thing in favor of a gamble of lower or 
equal expectation is called risk seeking. 

Bernoulli suggested that people do not evaluate prospects by the 
expectation of their monetary outcomes, but rather by the expectation of 
the subjective value of these outcomes. The subjective value of a gamble 
is again a weighted average, but now it is the subjective value of each 
outcome that is weighted by its probability. To explain risk aversion within 
this framework, Bernoulli proposed that subjective value, or utility, is a 
concave function of money. In such a function, the difference between the 
utilities of $200 and $100, for example, is greater than the utility difference 
between $1,200 and $1,100. It follows from concavity that the subjective 
value attached to a gain of $800 is more than 80% of the value of a gain of 
$1,000. Consequently, the concavity of the utility function entails a risk 
averse preference for a sure gain of $800 over an 80% chance to win 
$1,000, although the two prospects have the same monetary expectation. 

It is customary in decision analysis to describe the outcomes of 
decisions in terms of total wealth. For example, an offer to bet $20 on the 
toss of a fair coin is represented as a choice between an individual’s 



current wealth W and an even chance to move to W + $20 or to l/l/h 
indispan&gt; - $20. This representation appears psychologically unrealistic: 
People do not normally think of relatively small outcomes in terms of states 
of wealth but rather in terms of gains, losses, and neutral outcomes (such 
as the maintenance of the status quo). If the effective carriers of subjective 
value are changes of wealth rather than ultimate states of wealth, as we 
propose, the psychophysical analysis of outcomes should be applied to 
gains and losses rather than to total assets. This assumption plays a 
central role in a treatment of risky choice that we called prospect theory 
(Kahneman and Tversky 1979). Introspection as well as psychophysical 
measurements suggest that subjective value is a concave function of the 
size of a gain. The same generalization applies to losses as well. The 
difference in subjective value between a loss of $200 and a loss of $100 
appears greater than the difference in subjective value between a loss of 
$1,200 and a loss of $1,100. When the value functions for gains and for 
losses are pieced together, we obtain an S-shaped function of the type 
displayed in Figure 1. 

VALUE 


LOSSES 


GAINS 



Figure 1. A Hypothetical Value Function 

The value function shown in Figure 1 is (a) defined on gains and losses 
rather than on total wealth, (b) concave in the domain of gains and convex 
in the domain of losses, and (c) considerably steeper for losses than for 
gains. The last property, which we label loss aversion, expresses the 



intuition that a loss of $X is more aversive than a gain of $X is attractive. 
Loss aversion explains people’s reluctance to bet on a fair coin for equal 
stakes: The attractiveness of the possible gain is not nearly sufficient to 
compensate for the aversiveness of the possible loss. For example, most 
respondents in a sample of undergraduates refused to stake $10 on the 
toss of a coin if they stood to win less than $30. 

The assumption of risk aversion has played a central role in economic 
theory. However, just as the concavity of the value of gains entails risk 
aversion, the convexity of the value of losses entails risk seeking. Indeed, 
risk seeking in losses is a robust effect, particularly when the probabilities 
of loss are substantial. Consider, for example, a situation in which an 
individual is forced to choose between an 85% chance to lose $1,000 
(with a 15% chance to lose nothing) and a sure loss of $800. A large 
majority of people express a preference for the gamble over the sure loss. 
This is a risk seeking choice because the expectation of the gamble (- 
$850) is inferior to the expectation of the sure loss (-$800). Risk seeking 
in the domain of losses has been confirmed by several investigators 
(Fishburn and Kochenberger 1979; Hershey and Schoemaker 1980; 
Payne, Laughhunn, and Crum 1980; Slovic, Fischhoff, and Lichtenstein 
1982). It has also been observed with nonmonetary outcomes, such as 
hours of pain (Eraker and Sox 1981) and loss of human lives (Fischhoff 
1983; Tversky 1977; Tversky and Kahneman 1981). Is it wrong to be risk 
averse in the domain of gains and risk seeking in the domain of losses? 
These preferences conform to compelling intuitions about the subjective 
value of gains and losses, and the presumption is that people should be 
entitled to their own values. However, we shall see that an S-shaped value 
function has implications that are normatively unacceptable. 

To address the normative issue we turn from psychology to decision 
theory. Modern decision theory can be said to begin with the pioneering 
work of von Neumann and Morgenstern (1947), who laid down several 
qualitative principles, or axioms, that should g ctha211;$850)overn the 
preferences of a rational decision maker. Their axioms included transitivity 
(if A is preferred to B and B is preferred to C, then A is preferred to C), 
and substitution (if A is preferred to B, then an even chance to get A or C is 
preferred to an even chance to get B or C), along with other conditions of a 
more technical nature. The normative and the descriptive status of the 
axioms of rational choice have been the subject of extensive discussions. 
In particular, there is convincing evidence that people do not always obey 
the substitution axiom, and considerable disagreement exists about the 
normative merit of this axiom (e.g., Allais and Hagen 1979). However, all 
analyses of rational choice incorporate two principles: dominance and 
invariance. Dominance demands that if prospect A is at least as good as 



prospect B in every respect and better than B in at least one respect, then 
A should be preferred to B. Invariance requires that the preference order 
between prospects should not depend on the manner in which they are 
described. In particular, two versions of a choice problem that are 
recognized to be equivalent when shown together should elicit the same 
preference even when shown separately. We now show that the 
requirement of invariance, however elementary and innocuous it may 
seem, cannot generally be satisfied. 

Framing of Outcomes 

Risky prospects are characterized by their possible outcomes and by the 
probabilities of these outcomes. The same option, however, can be 
framed or described in different ways (Tverskyand Kahneman 1981). For 
example, the possible outcomes of a gamble can be framed either as 
gains and losses relative to the status quo or as asset positions that 
incorporate initial wealth. Invariance requires that such changes in the 
description of outcomes should not alter the preference order. The 
following pair of problems illustrates a violation of this requirement. The 
total number of respondents in each problem is denoted by/V, and the 
percentage who chose each option is indicated in parentheses. 

Problem 1 (N = 152): Imagine that the U.S. is preparing for the 
outbreak of an unusual Asian disease, which is expected to kill 
600 people. Two alternative programs to combat the disease 
have been proposed. Assume that the exact scientific estimates 
of the consequences of the programs are as follows: 

If Program A is adopted, 200 people will be saved. (72%) 

If Program B is adopted, there is a one-third probability that 
600 people will be saved and a two-thirds probability that no 
people will be saved. (28%) 

Which of the two programs would you favor? 

The formulation of Problem 1 implicitly adopts as a reference point a 
state of affairs in which the disease is allowed to take its toll of 600 lives. 
The outcomes of the programs include the reference state and two 
possible gains, measured by the number of lives saved. As expected, 
preferences are risk averse: A clear majority of respondents prefer saving 
200 lives for sure over a gamble that offers a one-third chance of saving 
600 lives. Now consider another problem in which the same cover story is 
followed by a different description of the prospects associated with the two 



programs: 


Problem 2 (N= 155): 

If Program C is adopted, 400 people will die. (22%) 

If Program D is adopted, there is a one-third probability that 
nobody will die and a two-thirds probability that 600 people will 
die. (78%) 

It is easy to verify that options C and D in Problem 2 are 
undistinguishable in real terms from options A and B in Problem 1, 
respectively. The second version, however, assumes a reference state in 
which no one dies of the disease. The best outcome is the maintenance of 
this state and the alternatives are losses measured by the number of 
people that will die of the disease. People who evaluate options in these 
terms are expected to show a risk seeking preference for the gamble 
(option D) over the sure loss of 400 lives. Indeed, there is more risk 
seeking in the second version of the problem than there is risk aversion in 
the first. 

The failure of invariance is both pervasive and robust. It is as common 
among sophisticated respondents as among naive ones, and it is not 
eliminated even when the same respondents answer both questions within 
a few minutes. Respondents confronted with their conflicting answers are 
typically puzzled. Even after rereading the problems, they still wish to be 
risk averse in the “lives saved” version; they wish to be risk seeking in the 
“lives lost’ version; and they also wish to obey invariance and give 
consistent answers in the two versions. In their stubborn appeal, framing 
effects resemble perceptual illusions more than computational errors. 

The following pair of problems elicits preferences that violate the 
dominance requirement of rational choice. 

Problem 3 (N = 86): Choose between: 


E. 25% chance to win $240 and 75% chance to lose $760 (0%) 

F. 25% chance to win $250 and 75% chance to lose $750 (100%) 

It is easy to see that F dominates E. Indeed, all respondents chose 
accordingly. 

Problem 4 (N = 150): Imagine that you face the following pair of 
concurrent decisions. 

First examine both decisions, then indicate the options you 



prefer. 


Decision (i) Choose between: 


A. a sure gain of $240 (84%) 

B. 25% chance to gain $1,000 and 75% chance to gain nothing (16%) 


Decision (ii) Choose between: 


C. a sure loss of $750 (13%) 

D. 75% chance to lose $1,000 and 25% chance to lose nothing (87%) 

As expected from the previous analysis, a large majority of subjects 
made a risk averse choice for the sure gain over the positive gamble in the 
first decision, and an even larger majority of subjects made a risk seeking 
choice for the gamble over the sure loss in the second decision. In fact, 
73% of the respondents chose A and D and only 3% chose B and C. The 
same cd Cce f pattern of results was observed in a modified version of the 
problem, with reduced stakes, in which undergraduates selected gambles 
that they would actually play. 

Because the subjects considered the two decisions in Problem 4 
simultaneously, they expressed in effect a preference for A and D over B 
and C. The preferred conjunction, however, is actually dominated by the 
rejected one. Adding the sure gain of $240 (option A) to option D yields a 
25% chance to win $240 and a 75% chance to lose $760. This is precisely 
option E in Problem 3. Similarly, adding the sure loss of $750 (option C) to 
option B yields a 25% chance to win $250 and a 75% chance to lose 
$750. This is precisely option F in Problem 3. Thus, the susceptibility to 
framing and the S-shaped value function produce a violation of dominance 
in a set of concurrent decisions. 

The moral of these results is disturbing: Invariance is normatively 
essential, intuitively compelling, and psychologically unfeasible. Indeed, we 
conceive only two ways of guaranteeing invariance. The first is to adopt a 
procedure that will transform equivalent versions of any problem into the 
same canonical representation. This is the rationale for the standard 
admonition to students of business, that they should consider each 
decision problem in terms of total assets rather than in terms of gains or 
losses (Schlaifer 1959). Such a representation would avoid the violations 



of invariance illustrated in the previous problems, but the advice is easier 
to give than to follow. Except in the context of possible ruin, it is more 
natural to consider financial outcomes as gains and losses rather than as 
states of wealth. Furthermore, a canonical representation of risky 
prospects requires a compounding of all outcomes of concurrent decisions 
(e.g., Problem 4) that exceeds the capabilities of intuitive computation 
even in simple problems. Achieving a canonical representation is even 
more difficult in other contexts such as safety, health, or quality of life. 
Should we advise people to evaluate the consequence of a public health 
policy (e.g., Problems 1 and 2) in terms of overall mortality, mortality due to 
diseases, or the number of deaths associated with the particular disease 
under study? 

Another approach that could guarantee invariance is the evaluation of 
options in terms of their actuarial rather than their psychological 
consequences. The actuarial criterion has some appeal in the context of 
human lives, but it is clearly inadequate for financial choices, as has been 
generally recognized at least since Bernoulli, and it is entirely inapplicable 
to outcomes that lack an objective metric. We conclude that frame 
invariance cannot be expected to hold and that a sense of confidence in a 
particular choice does not ensure that the same choice would be made in 
another frame. It is therefore good practice to test the robustness of 
preferences by deliberate attempts to frame a decision problem in more 
than one way (Fischhoff, Slovic, and Lichtenstein 1980). 

The Psychophysics of Chances 

Our discussion so far has assumed a Bernoullian expectation rule 
according to which the value, or utility, of an uncertain prospect is obtained 
by adding the utilities of the possible outcomes, each weighted by its 
probability. To examine this assumption, let us again consult 
psychophysical intuitions. Setting the value of the status quo at zero, 
imagine a cash gift, say of $300, and assign it a value of one. Now 
imagine that you are only given a ticket to a lottery that has a single prize of 
$300. How does the value of the ticket vary as a function of the probability 
of winning the prize? Barring utility for gambling, the value of such a 
prospect must vary between zero (when the chance of winning is nil 
cinntric. We) and one (when winning $300 is a certainty). 

Intuition suggests that the value of the ticket is not a linear function of the 
probability of winning, as entailed by the expectation rule. In particular, an 
increase from 0% to 5% appears to have a larger effect than an increase 
from 30% to 35%, which also appears smaller than an increase from 95% 



to 100%. These considerations suggest a category-boundary effect: A 
change from impossibility to possibility or from possibility to certainty has a 
bigger impact than a comparable change in the middle of the scale. This 
hypothesis is incorporated into the curve displayed in Figure 2, which plots 
the weight attached to an event as a function of its stated numerical 
probability. The most salient feature of Figure 2 is that decision weights 
are regressive with respect to stated probabilities. Except near the 
endpoints, an increase of .05 in the probability of winning increases the 
value of the prospect by less than 5% of the value of the prize. We next 
investigate the implications of these psychophysical hypotheses for 
preferences among risky options. 



STATED PROBABILITY: p 

Figure 2. A Hypothetical Weighting Function 

In Figure 2, decision weights are lower than the corresponding 
probabilities over most of the range. Underweighting of moderate and high 
probabilities relative to sure things contributes to risk aversion in gains by 
reducing the attractiveness of positive gambles. The same effect also 
contributes to risk seeking in losses by attenuating the aversiveness of 
negative gambles. Low probabilities, however, are overweighted, and very 
low probabilities are either overweighted quite grossly or neglected 
altogether, making the decision weights highly unstable in that region. The 



overweighting of low probabilities reverses the pattern described above: It 
enhances the value of long shots and amplifies the aversiveness of a small 
chance of a severe loss. Consequently, people are often risk seeking in 
dealing with improbable gains and risk averse in dealing with unlikely 
losses. Thus, the characteristics of decision weights contribute to the 
attractiveness of both lottery tickets and insurance policies. 

The nonlinearity of decision weights inevitably leads to violations of 
invariance, as illustrated in the following pair of problems: 

Problem 5 (N = 85): Consider the following two-stage game. In 
the first stage, there is a 75% chance to end the game without 
winning anything and a 25% chance to move into the second 
stage. If you reach the second stage you have a choice between: 


A. a sure win of $30 (74%) 

B. 80% chance to win $45 (26%) 


Your choice must be made before the game starts, i.e., before 
the outcome of the first stage is known. Please indicate the 
option you prefer. 


Problem 6 (N = 81): Which of the following options do you prefer? 


C. 25% chance to win $30 (42%) 

D. 20% chance to win $45 (58%) 

Because there is one chan ce i toce in four to move into the second 
stage in Problem 5, prospect A offers a .25 probability of winning $30, and 
prospect B offers .25 * .80 = .20 probability of winning $45. Problems 5 
and 6 are therefore identical in terms of probabilities and outcomes. 
However, the preferences are not the same in the two versions: A clear 
majority favors the higher chance to win the smaller amount in Problem 5, 
whereas the majority goes the other way in Problem 6. This violation of 
invariance has been confirmed with both real and hypothetical monetary 
payoffs (the present results are with real money), with human lives as 
outcomes, and with a nonsequential representation of the chance process. 

We attribute the failure of invariance to the interaction of two factors: the 
framing of probabilities and the nonlinearity of decision weights. More 



specifically, we propose that in Problem 5 people ignore the first phase, 
which yields the same outcome regardless of the decision that is made, 
and focus their attention on what happens if they do reach the second 
stage of the game. In that case, of course, they face a sure gain if they 
choose option A and an 80% chance of winning if they prefer to gamble. 
Indeed, people’s choices in the sequential version are practically identical 
to the choices they make between a sure gain of $30 and an 85% chance 
to win $45. Because a sure thing is overweighted in comparison with 
events of moderate or high probability , the option that may lead to a gain of 
$30 is more attractive in the sequential version. We call this phenomenon 
the pseudo-certainty effect because an event that is actually uncertain is 
weighted as if it were certain. 

A closely related phenomenon can be demonstrated at the low end of 
the probability range. Suppose you are undecided whether or not to 
purchase earthquake insurance because the premium is quite high. As you 
hesitate, your friendly insurance agent comes forth with an alternative offer: 
“For half the regular premium you can be fully covered if the quake occurs 
on an odd day of the month. This is a good deal because for half the price 
you are covered for more than half the days.” Why do most people find 
such probabilistic insurance distinctly unattractive? Figure 2 suggests an 
answer. Starting anywhere in the region of low probabilities, the impact on 
the decision weight of a reduction of probability fromp top/2 is 
considerably smaller than the effect of a reduction from p/2 to 0. Reducing 
the risk by half, then, is not worth half the premium. 

The aversion to probabilistic insurance is significant for three reasons. 
First, it undermines the classical explanation of insurance in terms of a 
concave utility function. According to expected utility theory, probabilistic 
insurance should be definitely preferred to normal insurance when the latter 
is just acceptable (see Kahneman and Tversky 1979). Second, 
probabilistic insurance represents many forms of protective action, such 
as having a medical checkup, buying new tires, or installing a burglar alarm 
system. Such actions typically reduce the probability of some hazard 
without eliminating it altogether. Third, the acceptability of insurance can 
be manipulated by the framing of the contingencies. An insurance policy 
that covers fire but not flood, for example, could be evaluated either as full 
protection against a specific risk (e.g., fire), or as a reduction in the overall 
probability of property loss. Figure 2 suggests that people greatly 
undervalue a reduction in the probability of a hazard in comparison to the 
complete elimination of that hazard. Hence, insurance should appear more 
attractive when it is framed as the elimination of risk than when it is 
described as a reduction of risk. Indeed, Slovic, Fischhoff, and 



Lichtenstein (1982) showed that a hypotheti ct amative cal vaccine that 
reduces the probability of contracting a disease from 20% to 10% is less 
attractive if it is described as effective in half of the cases than if it is 
presented as fully effective against one of two exclusive and equally 
probable virus strains that produce identical symptoms. 

Formulation Effects 

So far we have discussed framing as a tool to demonstrate failures of 
invariance. We now turn attention to the processes that control the framing 
of outcomes and events. The public health problem illustrates a formulation 
effect in which a change of wording from “lives saved” to “lives lost” 
induced a marked shift of preference from risk aversion to risk seeking. 
Evidently, the subjects adopted the descriptions of the outcomes as given 
in the question and evaluated the outcomes accordingly as gains or 
losses. Another formulation effect was reported by McNeil, Pauker, Sox, 
and Tversky (1982). They found that preferences of physicians and 
patients between hypothetical therapies for lung cancer varied markedly 
when their probable outcomes were described in terms of mortality or 
survival. Surgery, unlike radiation therapy, entails a risk of death during 
treatment. As a consequence, the surgery option was relatively less 
attractive when the statistics of treatment outcomes were described in 
terms of mortality rather than in terms of survival. 

A physician, and perhaps a presidential advisor as well, could influence 
the decision made by the patient or by the President, without distorting or 
suppressing information, merely by the framing of outcomes and 
contingencies. Formulation effects can occur fortuitously, without anyone 
being aware of the impact of the frame on the ultimate decision. They can 
also be exploited deliberately to manipulate the relative attractiveness of 
options. For example, Thaler (1980) noted that lobbyists for the credit card 
industry insisted that any price difference between cash and credit 
purchases be labeled a cash discount rather than a credit card surcharge. 
The two labels frame the price difference as a gain or as a loss by 
implicitly designating either the lower or the higher price as normal. 
Because losses loom larger than gains, consumers are less likely to 
accept a surcharge than to forgo a discount. As is to be expected, 
attempts to influence framing are common in the marketplace and in the 
political arena. 

The evaluation of outcomes is susceptible to formulation effects 
because of the nonlinearity of the value function and the tendency of people 
to evaluate options in relation to the reference point that is suggested or 



implied by the statement of the problem. It is worthy of note that in other 
contexts people automatically transform equivalent messages into the 
same representation. Studies of language comprehension indicate that 
people quickly recode much of what they hear into an abstract 
representation that no longer distinguishes whether the idea was 
expressed in an active or in a passive form and no longer discriminates 
what was actually said from what was implied, presupposed, or implicated 
(Clark and Clark 1977). Unfortunately, the mental machinery that performs 
these operations silently and effortlessly is not adequate to perform the 
task of recoding the two versions of the public health problem or the 
mortality survival statistics into a common abstract form. 

Transactions and Trades 

Our analysis of framing and of value can be extended to choices between 
multi attribute options, such as the acceptability of a transaction or a trade. 
We propose that, in order to evaluate a multi attribute option, a person sets 
up a men cset optiotal account that specifies the advantages and the 
disadvantages associated with the option, relative to a multiattribute 
reference state. The overall value of an option is given by the balance of its 
advantages and its disadvantages in relation to the reference state. Thus, 
an option is acceptable if the value of its advantages exceeds the value of 
its disadvantages. This analysis assumes psychological—but not physical 
—separability of advantages and disadvantages. The model does not 
constrain the manner in which separate attributes are combined to form 
overall measures of advantage and of disadvantage, but it imposes on 
these measures assumptions of concavity and of loss aversion. 

Our analysis of mental accounting owes a large debt to the stimulating 
work of Richard Thaler (1980, 1985), who showed the relevance of this 
process to consumer behavior. The following problem, based on examples 
of Savage (1954) and Thaler (1980), introduces some of the rules that 
govern the construction of mental accounts and illustrates the extension of 
the concavity of value to the acceptability of transactions. 

Problem 7: Imagine that you are about to purchase a jacket for 
$125 and a calculator for $15. The calculator salesman informs 
you that the calculator you wish to buy is on sale for $10 at the 
other branch of the store, located 20 minutes’ drive away. Would 
you make a trip to the other store? 

This problem is concerned with the acceptability of an option that 
combines a disadvantage of inconvenience with a financial advantage that 



can be framed as a minimal, topical, or comprehensive account. The 
minimal account includes only the differences between the two options and 
disregards the features that they share. In the minimal account, the 
advantage associated with driving to the other store is framed as a gain of 
$5. A topical account relates the consequences of possible choices to a 
reference level that is determined by the context within which the decision 
arises. In the preceding problem, the relevant topic is the purchase of the 
calculator, and the benefit of the trip is therefore framed as a reduction of 
the price, from $15 to $10. Because the potential saving is associated only 
with the calculator, the price of the jacket is not included in the topical 
account. The price of the jacket, as well as other expenses, could well be 
included in a more comprehensive account in which the saving would be 
evaluated in relation to, say, monthly expenses. 

The formulation of the preceding problem appears neutral with respect 
to the adoption of a minimal, topical, or comprehensive account. We 
suggest, however, that people will spontaneously frame decisions in terms 
of topical accounts that, in the context of decision making, play a role 
analogous to that of “good forms” in perception and of basic-level 
categories in cognition. Topical organization, in conjunction with the 
concavity of value, entails that the willingness to travel to the other store for 
a saving of $5 on a calculator should be inversely related to the price of the 
calculator and should be independent of the price of the jacket. To test this 
prediction, we constructed another version of the problem in which the 
prices of the two items were interchanged. The price of the calculator was 
given as $125 in the first store and $120 in the other branch, and the price 
of the jacket was set at $15. As predicted, the proportions of respondents 
who said they would make the trip differed sharply in the two problems. 
The results showed that 68% of the respondents (N = 88) were willing to 
drive to the other branch to save $5 on a $15 calculator, but only 29% of 93 
respondents were willing to make the same trip to save $5 on a $125 
calculator. This finding cThinchsupports the notion of topical organization 
of accounts, since the two versions are identical both in terms of a minimal 
and a comprehensive account. 

The significance of topical accounts for consumer behavior is confirmed 
by the observation that the standard deviation of the prices that different 
stores in a city quote for the same product is roughly proportional to the 
average price of that product (Pratt, Wise, and Zeckhauser 1979). Since 
the dispersion of prices is surely controlled by shoppers’ efforts to find the 
best buy, these results suggest that consumers hardly exert more effort to 
save $15 on a $150 purchase than to save $5 on a $50 purchase. 

The topical organization of mental accounts leads people to evaluate 



gains and losses in relative rather than in absolute terms, resulting in large 
variations in the rate at which money is exchanged for other things, such as 
the number of phone calls made to find a good buy or the willingness to 
drive a long distance to get one. Most consumers will find it easier to buy a 
car stereo system or a Persian rug, respectively, in the context of buying a 
car or a house than separately. These observations, of course, run counter 
to the standard rational theory of consumer behavior, which assumes 
invariance and does not recognize the effects of mental accounting. 

The following problems illustrate another example of mental accounting 
in which the posting of a cost to an account is controlled by topical 
organization: 

Problem 8 ( N= 200): Imagine that you have decided to see a play 
and paid the admission price of $10 per ticket. As you enter the 
theater, you discover that you have lost the ticket. The seat was 
not marked, and the ticket cannot be recovered. 

Would you pay $10 for another ticket? 

Yes (46%) No (54%) 


Problem 9 ( N= 183): Imagine that you have decided to see a play 
where admission is $10 per ticket. As you enter the theater, you 
discover that you have lost a $10 bill. 

Would you still pay $10 for a ticket for the play? 

Yes (88%) No (12%) 

The difference between the responses to the two problems is intriguing. 
Why are so many people unwilling to spend $10 after having lost a ticket, if 
they would readily spend that sum after losing an equivalent amount of 
cash? We attribute the difference to the topical organization of mental 
accounts. Going to the theater is normally viewed as a transaction in which 
the cost of the ticket is exchanged for the experience of seeing the play. 
Buying a second ticket increases the cost of seeing the play to a level that 
many respondents apparently find unacceptable. In contrast, the loss of the 
cash is not posted to the account of the play, and it affects the purchase of 
a ticket only by making the individual feel slightly less affluent. 

An interesting effect was observed when the two versions of the problem 
were presented to the same subjects. The willingness to replace a lost 
ticket increased significantly when that problem followed the lost-cash 
version. In contrast, the willingness to buy a ticket after losing cash was not 
affected by prior presentation of the other problem. The juxtaposition of the 
two problems apparent clemosition ly enabled the subjects to realize that it 



makes sense to think of the lost ticket as lost cash, but not vice versa. 

The normative status of the effects of mental accounting is questionable. 
Unlike earlier examples, such as the public health problem, in which the 
two versions differed only in form, it can be argued that the alternative 
versions of the calculator and ticket problems differ also in substance. In 
particular, it may be more pleasurable to save $5 on a $15 purchase than 
on a larger purchase, and it may be more annoying to pay twice for the 
same ticket than to lose $10 in cash. Regret, frustration, and self- 
satisfaction can also be affected by framing (Kahneman and Tversky 
1982). If such secondary consequences are considered legitimate, then 
the observed preferences do not violate the criterion of invariance and 
cannot readily be ruled out as inconsistent or erroneous. On the other 
hand, secondary consequences may change upon reflection. The 
satisfaction of saving $5 on a $15 item can be marred if the consumer 
discovers that she would not have exerted the same effort to save $10 on a 
$200 purchase. We do not wish to recommend that any two decision 
problems that have the same primary consequences should be resolved in 
the same way. We propose, however, that systematic examination of 
alternative framings offers a useful reflective device that can help decision 
makers assess the values that should be attached to the primary and 
secondary consequences of their choices. 

Losses and Costs 

Many decision problems take the form of a choice between retaining the 
status quo and accepting an alternative to it, which is advantageous in 
some respects and disadvantageous in others. The analysis of value that 
was applied earlier to unidimensional risky prospects can be extended to 
this case by assuming that the status quo defines the reference level for all 
attributes. The advantages of alternative options will then be evaluated as 
gains and their disadvantages as losses. Because losses loom larger than 
gains, the decision maker will be biased in favor of retaining the status 
quo. 

Thaler (1980) coined the term “endowment effect” to describe the 
reluctance of people to part from assets that belong to their endowment. 
When it is more painful to give up an asset than it is pleasurable to obtain 
it, buying prices will be significantly lower than selling prices. That is, the 
highest price that an individual will pay to acquire an asset will be smaller 
than the minimal compensation that would induce the same individual to 
give up that asset, once acquired. Thaler discussed some examples of the 
endowment effect in the behavior of consumers and entrepreneurs. 
Several studies have reported substantial discrepancies between buying 



and selling prices in both hypothetical and real transactions (Gregory 
1983; Hammack and Brown 1974; Knetsch and Sinden 1984). These 
results have been presented as challenges to standard economic theory, 
in which buying and selling prices coincide except for transaction costs 
and effects of wealth. We also observed reluctance to trade in a study of 
choices between hypothetical jobs that differed in weekly salary (S) and in 
the temperature (7) of the workplace. Our respondents were asked to 
imagine that they held a particular position ( S 1t Tf) and were offered the 
option of moving to a different position (S 2 , T 2 ), which was better in one 
respect and worse in another. We found that most subjects who were 
assigned to ( S 1t Ti) did not wish to move to (S 2 , T 2 ), and c2&lt; that most 
subjects who were assigned to the latter position did not wish to move to 
the former. Evidently, the same difference in pay or in working conditions 
looms larger as a disadvantage than as an advantage. 

In general, loss aversion favors stability over change. Imagine two 
hedonically identical twins who find two alternative environments equally 
attractive. Imagine further that by force of circumstance the twins are 
separated and placed in the two environments. As soon as they adopt their 
new states as reference points and evaluate the advantages and 
disadvantages of each other’s environments accordingly, the twins will no 
longer be indifferent between the two states, and both will prefer to stay 
where they happen to be. Thus, the instability of preferences produces a 
preference for stability. In addition to favoring stability over change, the 
combination of adaptation and loss aversion provides limited protection 
against regret and envy by reducing the attractiveness of foregone 
alternatives and of others’ endowments. 

Loss aversion and the consequent endowment effect are unlikely to play 
a significant role in routine economic exchanges. The owner of a store, for 
example, does not experience money paid to suppliers as losses and 
money received from customers as gains. Instead, the merchant adds 
costs and revenues over some period of time and only evaluates the 
balance. Matching debits and credits are effectively canceled prior to 
evaluation. Payments made by consumers are also not evaluated as 
losses but as alternative purchases. In accord with standard economic 
analysis, money is naturally viewed as a proxy for the goods and services 
that it could buy. This mode of evaluation is made explicit when an 
individual has in mind a particular alternative, such as, “I can either buy a 
new camera or a new tent.” In this analysis, a person will buy a camera if its 
subjective value exceeds the value of retaining the money it would cost. 

There are cases in which a disadvantage can be framed either as a cost 
or as a loss. In particular, the purchase of insurance can also be framed as 



a choice between a sure loss and the risk of a greater loss. In such cases 
the cost-loss discrepancy can lead to failures of invariance. Consider, for 
example, the choice between a sure loss of $50 and a 25% chance to lose 
$200. Slovic, Fischhoff, and Lichtenstein (1982) reported that 80% of their 
subjects expressed a risk-seeking preference for the gamble over the sure 
loss. However, only 35% of subjects refused to pay $50 for insurance 
against a 25% risk of losing $200. Similar results were also reported by 
Schoemaker and Kunreuther (1979) and by Hershey and Schoemaker 
(1980). We suggest that the same amount of money that was framed as an 
uncompensated loss in the first problem was framed as the cost of 
protection in the second. The modal preference was reversed in the two 
problems because losses are more aversive than costs. 

We have observed a similar effect in the positive domain, as illustrated 
by the following pair of problems: 

Problem 10: Would you accept a gamble that offers a 10% 
chance to win $95 and a 90% chance to lose $5? 


Problem 11: Would you pay $5 to participate in a lottery that 
offers a 10% chance to win $100 and a 90% chance to win 
nothing? 

A total of 132 undergraduates answered the two questions, which were 
separated by a short filler problem. The order of the questions was 
reversed for half the respondents. Although it is easily confirmed that the 
two problems offer objecti coffler problevely identical options, 55 of the 
respondents expressed different preferences in the two versions. Among 
them, 42 rejected the gamble in Problem 10 but accepted the equivalent 
lottery in Problem 11. The effectiveness of this seemingly inconsequential 
manipulation illustrates both the cost-loss discrepancy and the power of 
framing. Thinking of the $5 as a payment makes the venture more 
acceptable than thinking of the same amount as a loss. 

The preceding analysis implies that an individual’s subjective state can 
be improved by framing negative outcomes as costs rather than as losses. 
The possibility of such psychological manipulations may explain a 
paradoxical form of behavior that could be labeled the dead-loss effect. 
Thaler (1980) discussed the example of a man who develops tennis elbow 
soon after paying the membership fee in a tennis club and continues to 
play in agony to avoid wasting his investment. Assuming that the individual 
would not play if he had not paid the membership fee, the question arises: 
How can playing in agony improve the individual’s lot? Playing in pain, we 



suggest, maintains the evaluation of the membership fee as a cost. If the 
individual were to stop playing, he would be forced to recognize the fee as 
a dead loss, which may be more aversive than playing in pain. 

Concluding Remarks 

The concepts of utility and value are commonly used in two distinct senses: 
(a) experience value, the degree of pleasure or pain, satisfaction or 
anguish in the actual experience of an outcome; and (b) decision value, the 
contribution of an anticipated outcome to the overall attractiveness or 
aversiveness of an option in a choice. The distinction is rarely explicit in 
decision theory because it is tacitly assumed that decision values and 
experience values coincide. This assumption is part of the conception of 
an idealized decision maker who is able to predict future experiences with 
perfect accuracy and evaluate options accordingly. For ordinary decision 
makers, however, the correspondence of decision values between 
experience values is far from perfect (March 1978). Some factors that 
affect experience are not easily anticipated, and some factors that affect 
decisions do not have a comparable impact on the experience of 
outcomes. 

In contrast to the large amount of research on decision making, there 
has been relatively little systematic exploration of the psychophysics that 
relate hedonic experience to objective states. The most basic problem of 
hedonic psychophysics is the determination of the level of adaptation or 
aspiration that separates positive from negative outcomes. The hedonic 
reference point is largely determined by the objective status quo, but it is 
also affected by expectations and social comparisons. An objective 
improvement can be experienced as a loss, for example, when an 
employee receives a smaller raise than everyone else in the office. The 
experience of pleasure or pain associated with a change of state is also 
critically dependent on the dynamics of hedonic adaptation. Brickman and 
Campbell’s (1971) concept of the hedonic treadmill suggests the radical 
hypothesis that rapid adaptation will cause the effects of any objective 
improvement to be short-lived. The complexity and subtlety of hedonic 
experience make it difficult for the decision maker to anticipate the actual 
experience that outcomes will produce. Many a person who ordered a 
meal when ravenously hungry has admitted to a big mistake when the fifth 
course arrived on the table. The common mismatch of decision values and 
experience values introduces an additional element of uncertainty in many 
decision problems. 

The prevalence of framing effects and violations of invariance further 



complicates the relati ces maker won between decision values and 
experience values. The framing of outcomes often induces decision values 
that have no counterpart in actual experience. For example, the framing of 
outcomes of therapies for lung cancer in terms of mortality or survival is 
unlikely to affect experience, although it can have a pronounced influence 
on choice. In other cases, however, the framing of decisions affects not 
only decision but experience as well. For example, the framing of an 
expenditure as an uncompensated loss or as the price of insurance can 
probably influence the experience of that outcome. In such cases, the 
evaluation of outcomes in the context of decisions not only anticipates 
experience but also molds it. 


References 

Allais, M., and O. Hagen, eds. 1979 .Expected Utility 
Hypotheses and the Allais Paradox. Hingham, MA: D. Reidel. 
Bernoulli, D. 1954 [1738]. “Exposition of a New Theory on the 
Measurement of Risk.” Economethca 22: 23-36. 

Brickman, P., and D. T. Campbell. 1971. “Hedonic Relativism 
and Planning the Good Society.” In Adaptation Level Theory: A 
Symposium, ed. M. H. Appley. New York: Academic Press, 
287-302. 

Clark, H. H., and E. V. Clark. 1977. Psychology and Language. 
New York: Harcourt. 

Erakar, S. E., and H. C. Sox. 1981. “Assessment of Patients’ 
Preferences for Therapeutic Outcomes.” Medical Decision 
Making 1:29-39. 

Fischhoff, B. 1983. “Predicting Frames.” Journal of 
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition 9: 
103-16. 

Fischhoff, B., P. Slovic, and S. Lichtenstein. 1980. “Knowing 
What You Want: Measuring Labile Values.” In Cognitive 
Processes in Choice and Decision Behavior, ed. T. Wallsten. 
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum, 117-41. 

Fishburn, P. C., and G. A. Kochenberger. 1979. “Two-Piece von 
Neumann-Morgenstern Utility Functions.” Decision Sciences 10: 
503-18. 

Gregory, R. 1983. “Measures of Consumer’s Surplus: Reasons 
for the Disparity in Observed Values.” Unpublished manuscript, 
Keene State College, Keene, NH. 

Hammack, J., and G. M. Brown Jr. 1974. WaterfovJ and 



Wetlands: Toward Bioeconomic Analysis. Baltimore: Johns 
Hopkins University Press. 

Hershey, J. C., and P. J. H. Schoemaker. 1980. “Risk Taking and 
Problem Context in the Domain of Losses: An Expected-Utility 
Analysis.” Journal of Risk and Insurance 47:111-32. 

Kahneman, D., and A. Tversky. 1979. “Prospect Theory: An 
Analysis of Decision under Risk.” Econometrica 47: 263-91. 

-. 1982. “The Simulation Heuristic.” In Judgment Under 

Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases, ed. D. Kahneman, P. Slovic, 
and A. Tver c, aistsky. New York: Cambridge University Press, 
201-208. 

Knetsch, J., and J. Sinden. 1984. “Willingness to Pay and 
Compensation Demanded: Experimental Evidence of an 
Unexpected Disparity in Measures of Value.” Quarterly Journal 
of Economics 99: 507-21. 

March, J. G. 1978. “Bounded Rationality, Ambiguity, and the 
Engineering of Choice.” Bell Journal of Economics 9: 587-608. 
McNeil, B., S. Pauker, H. Sox Jr., and A. Tversky. 1982. “On the 
Elicitation of Preferences for Alternative Therapies.” New 
England Journal of Medicine 306:1259-62. 

Payne, J. W., D. J. Laughhunn, and R. Crum. 1980. “Translation 
of Gambles and Aspiration Level Effects in Risky Choice 
Behavior.” Management Science 26:1039-60. 

Pratt, J. W., D. Wise, and R. Zeckhauser. 1979. “Price 
Differences in Almost Competitive Markets.” Quarterly Journal of 
Economics 93:189-211. 

Savage, L. J. 1954. The Foundation of Statistics. New York: 
Wiley. 

Schlaifer, R. 1959. Probability and Statistics for Business 
Decisions. New York: McGraw-Hill. 

Schoemaker, P.J.H., and H. C. Kunreuther. 1979. “An 
Experimental Study of Insurance Decisions.” Journal of Risk and 
Insurance 46:603-18. 

Slovic, P, B. Fischhoff, and S. Lichtenstein. 1982. “Response 
Mode, Framing, and Informationprocessing Effects in Risk 
Assessment.” In New Directions for Methodology of Social and 
Behavioral Science: Question Framing and Response 
Consistency, ed. R. Hogarth. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 21- 
36. 

Thaler, R. 1980. “Toward a Positive Theory of Consumer 



Choice.” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 1: 
39-60. 

-. 1985. “Using Mental Accounting in a Theory of Consumer 

Behavior.” Marketing Science 4:199-214. 

Tversky, A. 1977. “On the Elicitation of Preferences: Descriptive 
and Prescriptive Considerations.” In Conflicting Objectives in 
Decisions, ed. D. Bell, R. L. Kenney, and H. Raiffa. New York: 
Wiley, 209-22. 

Tversky, A., and D. Kahneman. 1981. “The Framing of Decisions 
and the Psychology of Choice.” Science 211:453-58. 
von Neumann, J., and O. Morgenstern. 1947. Theory of Games 
and Economic Behavior, 2nd ed. Princeton: Princeton University 
Press. 



Also by Daniel Kahneman 

International Differences in Well-B f, aisan 
(written with Ed Diener and John F. Helliwell) 

Heuristics and Biases-. The Psychology of Intuitive Judgment 
(edited with Thomas Gilovich and Dale Griffin) 

Choices, Values, and Frames (edited with Amos Tversky) 

Well-Being: The Foundations of Hedonic Psychology 
(edited with Edward Diener and Norbert Schwartz) 

Judgment Under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases 
(edited with Paul Slovic and Amos Tversky) 

Attention and Effort 



Acknowledgments 


I am fortunate to have many friends and no shame about asking for help. 
Everyone of my friends has been approached, some of them many times, 
with requests for information or editorial suggestions. I apologize for not 
listing them all. A few individuals played a major role in making the book 
happen. My thanks go first to Jason Zweig, who urged me into the project 
and patiently tried to work with me until it became clear to both of us that I 
am impossible to work with. Throughout, he has been generous with his 
editorial advice and enviable erudition, and sentences that he suggested 
dot the book. Roger Lewin turned transcripts of a set of lectures into 
chapter draft s. Mary Himmelstein provided valuable assistance 
throughout. John Brockman began as an agent and became a trusted 
friend. Ran Hassin provided advice and encouragement when it was most 
needed. In the final stages of a long journey I had the indispensable help of 
Eric Chinski, my editor at Farrar, Straus and Giroux. He knew the book 
better than I did and the work became an enjoyable collaboration—I had 
not imagined that an editor could do as much as Eric did. My daughter, 
Lenore Shoham, rallied round to help me through the hectic final months, 
providing wisdom, a sharp critical eye, and many of the sentences in the 
“Speaking of sections. My wife, Anne Treisman, went through a lot and did 
a lot—I would have given up long ago without her steady support, wisdom, 
and endless patience. 



Notes 


Introduction 

prone to collect too few observations: We had read a book that criticized 
psychologists for using small samples, but did not explain their choices: 
Jacob Cohen, Statistical Pover Analysis for the Behavioral Sciences 
(Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum, 1969). 

question about words: I have slightly altered the original wording, which 
referred to letters in the first and third position of words. 
negative view of the mind: A prominent German psychologist has been 
our most persistent critic. Gerd Gigerenzer, “How to Make Cognitive 
Illusions Disappear,” European Review of Social Psychology 2 (1991): 
83-115. Gerd Gigerenzer, “Personal Reflections on Theory and 
Psychology,” Theory &amp; Psychology 20 (2010): 733-43. Daniel Kahneman 
and Amos Tversky, “On the Reality of Cognitive Illusions,” Psychological 
Review! 03 (1996): 582-91. 

offered plausible alternatives: Some examples from many are Valerie F. 
Reyna and Farrell J. Lloyd, “Physician Decision-Making and Cardiac Risk: 
Effects of Knowledge, Risk Perception, Risk Tolerance and Fuzzy- 
Processing,” Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied 12 (2006): 
179-95. Nicholas Epley and Thomas Gilovich, “The Anchoring-and- 
Adjustment Heuristic,” Psychological Science 17 (2006): 311-18. Norbert 
Schwarz et al., “Ease of Retrieval of Information: Another Look at the 
Availability Heuristic,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 61 
(1991): 195-202. Elke U. Weber et al., “Asymmetric Discounting in 
Intertemporal Choice,” Psychological Science 18 (2007): 516-23. 
George F. Loewenstein et al., “Risk as Feelings,” Psychological Bulletin 
127 (2001): 267-86. 

Nobel Prize that I received: The prize awarded in economics is named 
Bank of Sweden Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel. It 
was first given in 1969. Some physical scientists were not pleased with the 
addition of a Nobel Prize in social science, and the distinctive label of the 
economics prize was a compromise. 

prolonged practice: Herbert Simon and his
 students at Carnegie Mellon in 
the 1980s set the foundations for our understanding of expertise. For an 
excellent popular introduction to the subject, see Joshua Foer, 



Moonmlking wth Einstein: The Art and Science of Remembering (New 
York: Penguin Press, 2011). He presents work that is reviewed in more 
technical detail in K. Anders Ericsson et al., eds., The Cambridge 
Handbook of Expertise and Expert Performance (New York: Cambridge 
University Press, 2006.) 

kitchen ms on fire: Gary A. Klein, Sources ofPomr( Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press, 1999). 

studied chess masters: Herbert Simon was one of the great scholars of 
the twentieth century, whose discoveries and inventions ranged from 
political science (where he began his career) to economics (in which he 
won a Nobel Prize) to computer science (in which he was a pioneer) and 
to psychology. 

“The situation...recognition’ 1 . Herbert A. Simon, “What Is an Explanation of 
Behavior?” Psychological Science 3 (1992): 150-61. 
affect heuristic: The concept of the affect heuristic was developed by Paul 
Slovic, a classmate of Amos’s at Michigan and a lifelong friend. 
wthout noticing the substitution :. 

1: The Characters of the Story 

offered many labels: For reviews of the field, see Jonathan St. B. T. Evans 
and Keith Frankish, eds., In Tm Minds: Dual Processes and Beyond 
(New York: Oxford University Press, 2009); Jonathan St. B. T. Evans, 
“Dual-Processing Accounts of Reasoning, Judgment, and Social 
Cognition," Annual Review of Psychology 59 (2008): 25 {59 
eight="0%"5-78. Among the pioneers are Seymour Epstein, Jonathan 
Evans, Steven Sloman, Keith Stanovich, and Richard West. I borrow the 
terms System 1 and System 2 from early writings of Stanovich and West 
that greatly influenced my thinking: Keith E. Stanovich and Richard F. 
West, “Individual Differences in Reasoning: Implications for the Rationality 
Debate,” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 23 (2000): 645-65. 
subjective experience of agency. This sense of free will is sometimes 
illusory, as shown in Daniel M. Wegner, The Illusion of Conscious Will 
(Cambridge, MA: Bradford Books, 2003). 

attention is totally focused elsev^here: Nilli Lavie, “Attention, Distraction 
and Cognitive Control Under Load,” Current Directions in Psychological 
Science 19 (2010): 143^8. 

conflict betmen the tv\o systems: In the classic Stroop task, you are 
shown a display of patches of different colors, or of words printed in 
various colors. Your task is to call out the names of the colors, ignoring the 



words. The task is extremely difficult when the colored words are 
themselves names of color (e.g., GREEN printed in red, followed by Y 
ELLOW printed in green, etc.). 

psychopathic charm. Professor Hare wrote me to say, “Your teacher was 
right,” March 16, 2011. Robert D. Hare, Without Conscience: The 
Disturbing World of the Psychopaths Among Us (New York: Guilford 
Press, 1999). Paul Babiak and Robert D. Hare, Snakes in Suits: When 
Psychopaths Go to Work (New York: Harper, 2007). 
little people: Agents within the mind are called homunculi and are (quite 
properly) objects of professional derision. 

space in your v\orking memory. Alan D. Baddeley, “Working Memory: 

Looking Back and Looking Forward,” Nature Reviev\s: Neuroscience 4 
(2003): 829-38. Alan D. Baddeley, Your Memory: A User’s Guide (New 
York: Firefly Books, 2004). 

2: Attention and Effort 

Attention and Effort. Much of the material of this chapter draws on my 
Attention and Effort (1973). It is available for free download on my website 
(www.princeton.edu/~kahneman/docs/attention and effort/Attention hi qualitv.pdf) . 

The main theme of that book is the idea of a limited ability to pay attention 
and exert mental effort. Attention and effort were considered general 
resources that could be used to support many mental tasks. The idea of 
general capacity is controversial, but it has been extended by other 
psychologists and neuroscientists, who found support for it in brain 
research. See Marcel A. Just and Patricia A. Carpenter, “A Capacity 
Theory of Comprehension: Individual Differences in Working Memory,” 
Psychological Review 99 (1992): 122-49; Marcel A. Just et al., 
“Neuroindices of Cognitive Workload: Neuroimaging, Pupillometric and 
Event-Related Potential Studies of Brain Work,” Theoretical Issues in 
Ergonomics Science 4 (2003): 56-88. There is also growing experimental 
evidence for general-purpose resources of attention, as in Evie Vergauwe 
et al., “Do Mental Processes Share a Domain-General Resource?” 
Psychological Science 21 (2010): 384-90. There is imaging evidence 
that the mere anticipation of a high-effort task mobilizes activity in many 
areas of the brain, relative to a low-effort task of the same kind. Carsten N. 

Boehler et al., “Task-Load-Dependent Activation of Dopaminergic 
Midbrain Areas in the Absence of Reward,” Journal of Neuroscience 31 
(2011): 4955-61. 

pupil of the eye: Eckhard H. Hess, “Attitude and Pupil Size,” Scientific 



American 212 (1965): 46-54. 

on the subject’s mind: The word subject reminds some people of 
subjugation and slavery, and the American Psychological Association 
enjoins us to use the more democratic participant. Unfortunately, the 
politically correct label is a mouthful, which occupies memory space and 
slows thinking. I will do my best to use participant whenever possible but 
will switch to subject when necessary. 

heart rate increases: Daniel Kahneman et al., “Pupillary, Heart Rate, and 
Skin Resistance Changes During a Mental Task,” Journal of Experimental 
Psychology 79 (1969): 164-67. 

rapidly flashing letters: Daniel Kahneman, Jackson Beatty, and Irwin 
Pollack, “Perceptual Deficit During a Mental Task,” Science 15 (1967): 
218-19. We used a halfway mirror so that the observers saw the letters 
directly in front of them while facing the camera. In a control condition, the 
participants looked at the letter through a narrow aperture, to prevent any 
effect of the changing pupil size on their visual acuity. Their detection 
results showed the inverted-V pattern observed with other subjects. 

Much like the electricity meter. Attempting to perform several tasks at 
once may run into difficulties of several kinds. For example, it is physically 
impossible to say two different things at exactly the same time, and it may 
be easier to combine an auditory and a visual task than to combine two 
visual or two auditory tasks. Prominent psychological theories have 
attempted to attribute all mutual interference between tasks to competition 
for separate mechanisms. See Alan D. Baddeley, Working Memory (New 
York: Oxford University Press, 1986). With practice, people’s ability to 
multitask in specific ways may improve. However, the wide variety of very 
different tasks that interfere with each other supports the existence of a 
general resource of attention or effort that is necessary in many tasks. 
Studies of the brain: Michael E. Smith, Linda K. McEvoy, and Alan Gevins, 
“Neurophysiological Indices of Strategy Development and Skill 
Acquisition,” Cognitive Brain Research 7 (1999): 389-404. Alan Gevins 
et al., “High-Resolution EEG Mapping of Cortical Activation Related to 
Working Memory: Effects of Task Difficulty, Type of Processing and 
Practice,” Cerebral Cortex 7 (1997): 374-85. 

less effort to solve the same problems: For example, Sylvia K. Ahern and 
Jackson Beatty showed that individuals who scored higher on the SAT 
showed smaller pupillary dilations than low scorers in responding to the 
same task. “Physiological Signs of Information Processing Vary with 
Intelligence,” Science 205 (1979): 1289-92. 

“lawof least effort’ 1 . Wouter Kool et (ute979): 1289al., “Decision Making 
and the Avoidance of Cognitive Demand,” Journal of Experimental 



Psychology—General 139 (2010): 665-82. Joseph T. McGuire and 
Matthew M. Botvinick, “The Impact of Anticipated Demand on Attention 
and Behavioral Choice,” in Effortless Attention, ed. Brian Bruya 
(Cambridge, MA: Bradford Books, 2010), 103-20. 
balance of benefits and costs: Neuroscientists have identified a region of 
the brain that assesses the overall value of an action when it is completed. 
The effort that was invested counts as a cost in this neural computation. 
Joseph T. McGuire and Matthew M. Botvinick, “Prefrontal Cortex, 
Cognitive Control, and the Registration of Decision Costs,” PNAS 107 
(2010): 7922-26. 

read distracting mrds: Bruno Laeng et al., “Pupillary Stroop Effects,” 
Cognitive Processing 12 (2011): 13-21. 

associate wth intelligence: Michael I. Posner and Mary K. Rothbart, 
“Research on Attention Networks as a Model for the Integration of 
Psychological Science,” Annual Review of Psychology 58 (2007): 1-23. 
John Duncan et al., “A Neural Basis for General Intelligence,” Science 289 
(2000): 457-60. 

under time pressure: Stephen Monsell, “Task Switching,” Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences 7 (2003): 134-40. 
working memory. Baddeley, Working Memory. 

tests of general intelligence: Andrew A. Conway, Michael J. Kane, and 
Randall W. Engle, “Working Memory Capacity and Its Relation to General 
Intelligence,” Trends in Cognitive Sciences 7 (2003): 547-52. 

Israeli Air Force pilots: Daniel Kahneman, Rachel Ben-lshai, and Michael 
Lotan, “Relation of a Test of Attention to Road Accidents,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology 58 (1973): 113-15. Daniel Gopher, “A Selective 
Attention Test as a Predictor of Success in Flight Training,” Human 
Factors 24 (1982): 173-83. 

3: The Lazy Controller 

“optimal experience’ 1 . Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, Flow The Psychology of 
Optimal Experience (New York: Harper, 1990). 

sv\eet tooth: Baba Shiv and Alexander Fedorikhin, “Heart and Mind in 
Conflict: The Interplay of Affect and Cognition in Consumer Decision 
Making,” Journal of Consumer Research 26 (1999): 278-92. Malte 
Friese, Wilhelm Hofmann, and Michaela Wanke, “When Impulses Take 
Over: Moderated Predictive Validity of Implicit and Explicit Attitude 
Measures in Predicting Food Choice and Consumption Behaviour,” British 
Journal of Social Psychology 47 (2008): 397-419. 



cognitively busy: Daniel T. Gilbert, “How Mental Systems Believe,” 
American Psychologist 46 (1991): 107-19. C. Neil Macrae and Galen V. 
Bodenhausen, “Social Cognition: Thinking Categorically about Others,” 
Annual Reviewof Psychology 51 (2000): 93-120. 
po {'&gt;&lt;21; : Sian L. Beilock and Thomas H. Carr, “When High-Powered 
People Fail: Working Memory and Choking Under Pressure in Math,” 
Psychological Science 16 (2005): 101-105. 

exertion of self-control: Martin S. Hagger et al., “Ego Depletion and the 
Strength Model of Self-Control: A Meta-Analysis,” Psychological Bulletin 
136 (2010): 495-525. 

resist the effects of ego depletion: Mark Muraven and Elisaveta 
Slessareva, “Mechanisms of Self-Control Failure: Motivation and Limited 
Resources,” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 29 (2003): 894- 
906. Mark Muraven, Dianne M. Tice, and Roy F. Baumeister, “Self-Control 
as a Limited Resource: Regulatory Depletion Patterns,” Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology 74 (1998): 774-89. 
more than a mere metaphor. Matthew T. Gailliot et al., “Self-Control Relies 
on Glucose as a Limited Energy Source: Willpower Is More Than a 
Metaphor,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 92 (2007): 
325-36. Matthew T. Gailliot and Roy F. Baumeister, “The Physiology of 
Willpower: Linking Blood Glucose to Self-Control,” Personality and Social 
Psychology Review 11 (2007): 303-27. 

ego depletion: Gailliot, “Self-Control Relies on Glucose as a Limited 
Energy Source.” 

depletion effects in judgment Shai Danziger, Jonathan Levav, and Liora 
Avnaim-Pesso, “Extraneous Factors in Judicial Decisions,” PA/AS 108 
(2011): 6889-92. 

intuitive—incorrect —answer Shane Frederick, “Cognitive Reflection and 
Decision Making,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 19 (2005): 25-42. 
syllogism as valid: This systematic error is known as the belief bias. 
Evans, “Dual-Processing Accounts of Reasoning, Judgment, and Social 
Cognition.” 

call them more rational: Keith E. Stanovich, Rationality and the 
Reflective Mind (New York: Oxford University Press, 2011). 
cruel dilemma: Walter Mischel and Ebbe B. Ebbesen, “Attention in Delay 
of Gratification,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 16 (1970): 
329-37. 

“There vo ere no toys...distress’ 1 . Inge-Marie Eigsti et al., “Predicting 
Cognitive Control from Preschool to Late Adolescence and Young 
Adulthood,” Psychological Science 17 (2006): 478-84. 



higher scores on tests of intelligence: Mischel and Ebbesen, “Attention in 
Delay of Gratification.” Walter Mischel, “Processes in Delay of 
Gratification,” in Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, Vol. 7, 
ed. Leonard Berkowitz (San Diego, CA: Academic Press, 1974), 249-92. 
Walter Mischel, Yuichi Shoda, and Monica L. Rodriguez, “Delay of 
Gratification in Children,” Science 244 (1989): 933-38. Eigsti, “Predicting 
Cognitive Control from Preschool to Late Adolescence.” 
improvement vies maintained: M. Rosario Rued { Rocenca et al., 
“Training, Maturation, and Genetic Influences on the Development of 
Executive Attention,” PNAS 102 (2005): 14931-36. 
conventional measures of intelligence: Maggie E. Toplak, Richard F. 
West, and Keith E. Stanovich, “The Cognitive Reflection Test as a 
Predictor of Performance on Heuristics-and-Biases Tasks,” Memory &amp; 
Cognition (in press). 

4: The Associative Machine 

Associative Machine: Carey K. Morewedge and Daniel Kahneman, 
“Associative Processes in Intuitive Judgment,” Trends in Cognitive 
Sciences 14 (2010): 435-40. 

beyond your control: To avoid confusion, I did not mention in the text that 
the pupil also dilated. The pupil dilates both during emotional arousal and 
when arousal accompanies intellectual effort. 

think with your body. Paula M. Niedenthal, “Embodying Emotion,” Science 
316(2007): 1002-1005. 

WASH primes SOAP: The image is drawn from the working of a pump. 
The first few draws on a pump do not bring up any liquid, but they enable 
subsequent draws to be effective. 

“finds he ityellowinstantly’\ John A. Bargh, Mark Chen, and Lara Burrows, 
“Automaticity of Social Behavior: Direct Effects of Trait Construct and 
Stereotype Activation on Action,” Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology 71 (1996): 230-44. 

words related to old age: Thomas Mussweiler, “Doing Is for Thinking! 
Stereotype Activation by Stereotypic Movements,” Psychological Science 
17(2006): 17-21. 

The Far Side: Fritz Strack, Leonard L. Martin, and Sabine Stepper, 
“Inhibiting and Facilitating Conditions of the Human Smile: A Nonobtrusive 
Test of the Facial Feedback Hypothesis,” Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology 54 (1988): 768-77. 

upsetting pictures: Ulf Dimberg, Monika Thunberg, and Sara Grunedal, 



“Facial Reactions to Emotional Stimuli: Automatically Controlled Emotional 
Responses,” Cognition and Emotion 16 (2002): 449-71. 
listen to messages: Gary L. Wells and Richard E. Petty, “The Effects of 
Overt Head Movements on Persuasion: Compatibility and Incompatibility 
of Responses,” Basic and Applied Social Psychology 1 (1980): 219-30. 
increase the funding of schools: Jonah Berger, Marc Meredith, and S. 
Christian Wheeler, “Contextual Priming: Where People Vote Affects How 
They Vote,” PNAS 105 (2008): 8846-49. 

Reminders of money: Kathleen D. Vohs, “The Psychological 
Consequences of Money,” Science 314 (2006): 1154-56. 
appeal of authoritarian ideas: Jeff Greenberg et al., “Evidence for Terror 
Management Theory II: The Effect of Mortality Salience on Reactions to 
Those Who Threaten or Bolster the Cultural Worldview,” Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology {gy 

“Lady Macbeth effect 1 . Chen-Bo Zhong and Katie Liljenquist, “Washing 
Away Your Sins: Threatened Morality and Physical Cleansing,” Science 
313(2006): 1451-52. 

preferred mouthvwsh over soap: Spike Lee and Norbert Schwarz, “Dirty 
Hands and Dirty Mouths: Embodiment of the Moral-Purity Metaphor Is 
Specific to the Motor Modality Involved in Moral Transgression,” 
Psychological Science 21 (2010): 1423-25. 

at a British university. Melissa Bateson, Daniel Nettle, and Gilbert 
Roberts, “Cues of Being Watched Enhance Cooperation in a Real-World 
Setting,” Biology Letters 2 (2006): 412-14. 

introduced to that stranger. Timothy Wilson’s Strangers to Ourselves 
(Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press, 2002) presents a concept of an 
“adaptive unconscious” that is similar to System 1. 

5: Cognitive Ease 

“Easy”and “Strained’ 1 . The technical term for cognitive ease is fluency, 
diverse inputs and outputs: Adam L. Alter and Daniel M. Oppenheimer, 
“Uniting the Tribes of Fluency to Form a Metacognitive Nation,” 
Personality and Social Psychology Review! 3 (2009): 219-35. 
“Becoming Famous Overnight’ 1 . Larry L. Jacoby, Colleen Kelley, Judith 
Brown, and Jennifer Jasechko, “Becoming Famous Overnight: Limits on 
the Ability to Avoid Unconscious Influences of the Past,” Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology 56 (1989): 326-38. 
nicely stated the problem: Bruce W. A. Whittlesea, Larry L. Jacoby, and 
Krista Girard, “Illusions of Immediate Memory: Evidence of an Attributional 



Basis for Feelings of Familiarity and Perceptual Quality,” Journal of 
Memory and Language 29 (1990): 716-32. 

The impression of familiarity: Normally, when you meet a friend you can 
immediately place and name him; you often know where you met him last, 
what he was wearing, and what you said to each other. The feeling of 
familiarity becomes relevant only when such specific memories are not 
available. It is a fallback. Although its reliability is imperfect, the fallback is 
much better than nothing. It is the sense of familiarity that protects you from 
the embarrassment of being (and acting) astonished when you are greeted 
as an old friend by someone who only looks vaguely familiar. 

“body temperature of a chicken’ 1 . Ian Begg, Victoria Armour, and Therese 
Kerr, “On Believing What We Remember,” Canadian Journal of 
Behavioural Science 17 (1985): 199-214. 

low credibility. Daniel M. Oppenheimer, “Consequences of Erudite 
Vernacular Utilized Irrespective of Necessity: Problems with Using Long 
Words Needlessly,” Applied Cognitive Psychology 20 (2006): 139-56. 
v\hen they rhymed: Matthew S. Me Glone and Jessica Tofighbakhsh, 
“Birds of a Feather Flock Conjointly (?): Rhyme as Reas 
{RhyPsychological Science 11 (2000): 424-28. 
fictitious Turkish companies: Anuj K. Shah and Daniel M. Oppenheimer, 
“Easy Does It: The Role of Fluency in Cue Weighting,” Judgment and 
Decision Making Journal 2 (2007): 371-79. 

engaged and analytic mode: Adam L. Alter, Daniel M. Oppenheimer, 
Nicholas Epley, and Rebecca Eyre, “Overcoming Intuition: Metacognitive 
Difficulty Activates Analytic Reasoning,” Journal of Experimental 
Psychology— General 136 (2007): 569-76. 

pictures of objects: Piotr Winkielman and John T. Cacioppo, “Mind at 
Ease Puts a Smile on the Face: Psychophysiological Evidence That 
Processing Facilitation Increases Positive Affect,” Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology 81 (2001): 989-1000. 

small advantage: Adam L. Alter and Daniel M. Oppenheimer, “Predicting 
Short-Term Stock Fluctuations by Using Processing Fluency,” PNAS 103 
(2006). Michael J. Cooper, Orlin Dimitrov, and P. Raghavendra Rau, “A 
Rose.com by Any Other Name,” Journal of Finance 56 (2001): 2371-88. 
clunky labels: Pascal Pensa, “Nomen Est Omen: How Company Names 
Influence Shortand Long-Run Stock Market Performance,” Social Science 
Research Network Working Paper, September 2006. 
mere exposure effect: Robert B. Zajonc, “Attitudinal Effects of Mere 
Exposure,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 9 (1968): 1-27. 
favorite experiments: Robert B. Zajonc and D. W. Rajecki, “Exposure and 



Affect: A Field Experiment,” Psychonomic Science 17 (1969): 216-17. 
never consciously sees: Jennifer L. Monahan, Sheila T. Murphy, and 
Robert B. Zajonc, “Subliminal Mere Exposure: Specific, General, and 
Diffuse Effects,” Psychological Science 11 (2000): 462-66. 
inhabiting the shell : D. W. Rajecki, “Effects of Prenatal Exposure to 
Auditory or Visual Stimulation on Postnatal Distress Vocalizations in 
Chicks,” Behavioral Biology 11 (1974): 525-36. 

“The consequences...social stability n . Robert B. Zajonc, “Mere Exposure: 
A Gateway to the Subliminal,” Current Directions in Psychological 
Science 10 (2001): 227. 

triad of wards: Annette Bolte, Thomas Goschke, and Julius Kuhl, “Emotion 
and Intuition: Effects of Positive and Negative Mood on Implicit Judgments 
of Semantic Coherence,” Psychological Science 14 (2003): 416-21. 
association is retrieved: The analysis excludes all cases in which the 
subject actually found the correct solution. It shows that even subjects who 
will ultimately fail to find a common association have some idea of whether 
there is one to be found. 

increase cognitive ease: Sascha Topolinski and Fritz Strack, “The 
Architecture of Intuition: Fluency and Affect Determine {ectition Intuitive 
Judgments of Semantic and Visual Coherence and Judgments of 
Grammaticality in Artificial Grammar Learning,” Journal of Experimental 
Psychology—General 138 (2009): 39-63. 

doubled accuracy. Bolte, Goschke, and Kuhl, “Emotion and Intuition.” 
form a cluster. Barbara Fredrickson, Positivity: Groundbreaking 
Research Reveals How to Embrace the Hidden Strength of Positive 
Emotions, Overcome Negativity, and Thrive (New York: Random House, 
2009). Joseph P. Forgas and Rebekah East, “On Being Happy and 
Gullible: Mood Effects on Skepticism and the Detection of Deception,” 
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 44 (2008): 1362-67. 
smiling reaction: Sascha Topolinski et al., “The Face of Fluency: Semantic 
Coherence Automatically Elicits a Specific Pattern of Facial Muscle 
Reactions,” Cognition and Emotion 23 (2009): 260-71. 

“previous research...individuals’ 1 . Sascha Topolinski and Fritz Strack, 
“The Analysis of Intuition: Processing Fluency and Affect in Judgments of 
Semantic Coherence,” Cognition and Emotion 23 (2009): 1465-1503. 

6: Norms, Surprises, and Causes 

An observer. Daniel Kahneman and Dale T. Miller, “Norm Theory: 
Comparing Reality to Its Alternatives,” Psychological Review 93 (1986): 



136-53. 

“tattoo on my back’ 1 . Jos J. A. Van Berkum, “Understanding Sentences in 
Context: What Brain Waves Can Tell Us,” Current Directions in 
Psychological Science 17 (2008): 376-80. 

the wore/ pickpocket: Ran R. Hassin, John A. Bargh, and James S. 
Uleman, “Spontaneous Causal Inferences,” Journal of Experimental 
Social Psychology 38 (2002): 515-22. 

indicate surprise: Albert Michotte, The Perception of Causality (Andover, 
MA: Methuen, 1963). Alan M. Leslie and Stephanie Keeble, “Do Six- 
Month-Old Infants Perceive Causality?” Cognition 25 (1987): 265-88. 
explosive finale: Fritz Heider and Mary-Ann Simmel, “An Experimental 
Study of Apparent Behavior,” American Journal of Psychology 13 (1944): 
243-59. 

identify bullies and victims: Leslie and Keeble, “Do Six-Month-Old Infants 
Perceive Causality?” 

as ne die: Paul Bloom, “Is God an Accident?” Atlantic, December 2005. 

7: A Machine for Jumping to Conclusions 

elegant experiment Daniel T. Gilbert, Douglas S. Krull, and Patrick S. 
Malone, “Unbelieving the Unbelievable: Some Problems in the Rejection of 
False Information,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 59 
(1990): 601-13. 

descriptions of two people: Solomon E. Asch, “Forming {#823. 

Impressions of Personality,” Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology 
41 (1946): 258-90. 
all six adjectives: Ibid. 

Wisdom of Crowds: James Surowiecki, The Wisdom of CrowJs (New 
York: Anchor Books, 2005). 

one-sided evidence: Lyle A. Brenner, Derek J. Koehler, and Amos 
Tversky, “On the Evaluation of One-Sided Evidence,” Journal of 
Behavioral Decision Making 9 (1996): 59-70. 

8: How Judgments Happen 

biological roots: Alexander Todorov, Sean G. Baron, and Nikolaas N. 
Oosterhof, “Evaluating Face Trustworthiness: A Model-Based Approach,” 
Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience 3 (2008): 119-27. 
friendly or hostile: Alexander Todorov, Chris P. Said, Andrew D. Engell, 
and Nikolaas N. Oosterhof, “Understanding Evaluation of Faces on Social 



Dimensions,” Trends in Cognitive Sciences 12 (2008): 455-60. 
may spell trouble: Alexander Todorov, Manish Pakrashi, and Nikolaas N. 
Oosterhof, “Evaluating Faces on Trustworthiness After Minimal Time 
Exposure,” Social Cognition 27 (2009): 813-33. 

Australia, Germany, and Mexico: Alexander Todorov et al., “Inference of 
Competence from Faces Predict Election Outcomes,” Science 308 
(2005): 1623-26. Charles C. Ballew and Alexander Todorov, “Predicting 
Political Elections from Rapid and Unreflective Face Judgments,” PNAS 
104 (2007): 17948-53. Christopher Y Olivola and Alexander Todorov, 
“Elected in 100 Milliseconds: Appearance-Based Trait Inferences and 
Voting,” Journal of Nonverbal Behavior34 (2010): 83-110. 
v\atch less television: Gabriel Lenz and Chappell Lawson, “Looking the 
Part: Television Leads Less Informed Citizens to Vote Based on 
Candidates’ Appearance,” American Journal of Political Science 
(forthcoming). 

absence of a specific task set Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman, 
“Extensional Versus Intuitive Reasoning: The Conjunction Fallacy in 
Probability Judgment,” Psychological ReviewQO (1983): 293-315. 

Exxon Valdez: William H. Desvousges et al., “Measuring Natural Resource 
Damages with Contingent Valuation: Tests of Validity and Reliability,” in 
Contingent Valuation: A Critical Assessment , ed. Jerry A. Hausman 
(Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1993), 91-159. 

sense of injustice: Stanley S. Stevens, Psychophysics: Introduction to Its 
Perceptual, Neural, and Social Prospect (New York: Wiley, 1975). 
detected that the i/i ords rhymed: Mark S. Seidenberg and Michael K. 
Tanenhaus, “Orthographic Effects on Rhyme Monitoring,” Journal of 
Experimental Psychology—Human Learning and Memory 5 (1979): 
546-54. 

95-96 sentence was literally true: Sam Glucksberg, Patricia Gildea, and 
Howard G. Boo {How&gt; 

Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior 21 (1982): 85-98. 

9: Answering an Easier Question 

an intuitive ansv\er to it came readily to mind: An alternative approach to 
judgment heuristics has been proposed by Gerd Gigerenzer, Peter M. 
Todd, and the ABC Research Group, in Simple Heuristics That Make Us 
Smart (New York: Oxford University Press, 1999). They describe “fast and 
frugal” formal procedures such as “Take the best [cue],” which under some 
circumstances generate quite accurate judgments on the basis of little 



information. As Gigerenzer has emphasized, his heuristics are different 
from those that Amos and I studied, and he has stressed their accuracy 
rather than the biases to which they inevitably lead. Much of the research 
that supports fast and frugal heuristic uses statistical simulations to show 
that they could work in some real-life situations, but the evidence for the 
psychological reality of these heuristics remains thin and contested. The 
most memorable discovery associated with this approach is the 
recognition heuristic, illustrated by an example that has become well- 
known: a subject who is asked which of two cities is larger and recognizes 
one of them should guess that the one she recognizes is larger. The 
recognition heuristic works fairly well if the subject knows that the city she 
recognizes is large; if she knows it to be small, however, she will quite 
reasonably guess that the unknown city is larger. Contrary to the theory, the 
subjects use more than the recognition cue: Daniel M. Oppenheimer, “Not 
So Fast! (and Not So Frugal!): Rethinking the Recognition Heuristic,” 
Cognition 90 (2003): B1-B9. A weakness of the theory is that, from what 
we know of the mind, there is no need for heuristics to be frugal. The brain 
processes vast amounts of information in parallel, and the mind can be fast 
and accurate without ignoring information. Furthermore, it has been known 
since the early days of research on chess masters that skill need not 
consist of learning to use less information. On the contrary, skill is more 
often an ability to deal with large amounts of information quickly and 
efficiently. 

best examples of substitution: Fritz Strack, Leonard L. Martin, and Norbert 
Schwarz, “Priming and Communication: Social Determinants of 
Information Use in Judgments of Life Satisfaction,” European Journal of 
Social Psychology 18 (1988): 429-42. 

correlations between psychological measures: The correlation was .66. 
dominates happiness reports: Other substitution topics include marital 
satisfaction, job satisfaction, and leisure time satisfaction: Norbert 
Schwarz, Fritz Strack, and Hans-Peter Mai, “Assimilation and Contrast 
Effects in Part-Whole Question Sequences: A Conversational Logic 
Analysis,” Public Opinion Quarterly 55 (1991): 3-23. 
evaluate their happiness: A telephone survey conducted in Germany 
included a question about general happiness. When the self-reports of 
happiness were correlated with the local weather at the time of the 
interview, a pronounced correlation was found. Mood is known to vary with 
the weather, and substitution explains the effect on reported happiness. 
However, another version of the telephone survey yielded a somewhat 
different result. These respondents were asked about the current weather 
before they were asked the happiness quest {ppiournal ofion. For them, 



weather had no effect at ail on reported happiness! The explicit priming of 
weather provided them with an explanation of their mood, undermining the 
connection that would normally be made between current mood and overall 
happiness. 

view of the benefits: Melissa L. Finucane et al., “The Affect Heuristic in 
Judgments of Risks and Benefits,” Journal of Behavioral Decision 
Making 13(2000): 1-17. 

10: The Law of Small Numbers 

“It is both.. .wthout additives’ 1 . Howard Wainer and Harris L. Zwerling, 
“Evidence That Smaller Schools Do Not Improve Student Achievement,” 
Phi Delta Kappan 88 (2006): 300-303. The example was discussed by 
Andrew Gelman and Deborah Nolan, Teaching Statistics: A Bag of Tricks 
(New York: Oxford University Press, 2002). 

50% risk of failing: Jacob Cohen, “The Statistical Power of Abnormal- 
Social Psychological Research: A Review,” Journal of Abnormal and 
Social Psychology 65 (1962): 145-53. 

“Belief in the Law of Small Numbers* Amos Tversky and Daniel 
Kahneman, “Belief in the Law of Small Numbers,” Psychological Bulletin 
76 (1971): 105-10. 

“statistical intuitions.. .whenever possible’ 1 . The contrast that we drew 
between intuition and computation seems to foreshadow the distinction 
between Systems 1 and 2, but we were a long way from the perspective of 
this book. We used intuition to cover anything but a computation, any 
informal way to reach a conclusion. 

German spies: William Feller, Introduction to Probability Theory and Its 
Applications (New York: Wiley, 1950). 

randomness in basketball: Thomas Gilovich, Robert Vallone, and Amos 
Tversky, “The Hot Hand in Basketball: On the Misperception of Random 
Sequences,” Cognitive Psychology 17 (1985): 295-314. 

11: Anchors 

“‘reasonable’volume”: Robyn Le Boeuf and Eldar Shafir, “The Long and 
Short of It: Physical Anchoring Effects,” Journal of Behavioral Decision 
Making 19 (2006): 393^06. 

nod their head: Nicholas Epley and Thomas Gilovich, “Putting Adjustment 
Back in the Anchoring and Adjustment Heuristic: Differential Processing of 
Self-Generated and Experimenter-Provided Anchors,” Psychological 



Science 12 (2001): 391-96. 

stay closer to the anchor. Epley and Gilovich, “The Anchoring-and- 
Adjustment Heuristic.” 

associative coherence: Thomas Mussweiler, “The Use of Category and 
Exemplar Knowledge in the Solution of Anchoring Tasks,” Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology 78 (2000): 1038-52. 

San Francisco Exploratorium: Karen E. Jacowitz and Daniel Kahneman, 
“Measures of Anchoring in Estimation Tasks,” Person {pantion ality and 
Social Psychology Bulletin 21 (1995): 1161-66. 

substantially lover. Gregory B. Northcraft and Margaret A. Neale, 
“Experts, Amateurs, and Real Estate: An Anchoring-and-Adjustment 
Perspective on Property Pricing Decisions,” Organizational Behavior and 
Human Decision Processes 39 (1987): 84-97. The high anchor was 12% 
above the listed price, the low anchor was 12% below that price. 
rolled a pair of dice: Birte Englich, Thomas Mussweiler, and Fritz Strack, 
“Playing Dice with Criminal Sentences: The Influence of Irrelevant Anchors 
on Experts’ Judicial Decision Making,” Personality and Social 
Psychology Bulletin 32 (2006): 188-200. 

NO u MIT per person: Brian Wansink, Robert J. Kent, and Stephen J. Hoch, 

“An Anchoring and Adjustment Model of Purchase Quantity Decisions,” 

Journal of Marketing Research 35 (1998): 71-81. 

resist the anchoring effect. Adam D. Galinsky and Thomas Mussweiler, 

“First Offers as Anchors: The Role of Perspective-Taking and Negotiator 

Focus,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 81 (2001): 657- 

69. 

othenrise be much smaller. Greg Pogarsky and Linda Babcock, 
“Damage Caps, Motivated Anchoring, and Bargaining Impasse,” Journal 
of Legal Studies 30 (2001): 143-59. 

amount of damages: For an experimental demonstration, see Chris 
Guthrie, Jeffrey J. Rachlinski, and Andrew J. Wistrich, “Judging by 
Heuristic-Cognitive Illusions in Judicial Decision Making,” Judicature 86 
(2002): 44-50. 


12: The Science of Availability 

“the ease with which". Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman, “Availability: A 
Heuristic for Judging Frequency and Probability,” Cognitive Psychology 5 
(1973): 207-32. 

self-assessed contributions: Michael Ross and Fiore Sicoly, “Egocentric 
Biases in Availability and Attribution,” Journal of Personality and Social 



Psychology 37 (1979): 322-36. 

A major advance: Schwarz et al., “Ease of Retrieval as Information.” 
role of fluency. Sabine Stepper and Fritz Strack, “Proprioceptive 
Determinants of Emotional and Nonemotional Feelings,” Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology 64 (1993): 211-20. 
experimenters dreamed up: For a review of this area of research, see 
Rainer Greifeneder, Herbert Bless, and Michel T. Pham, “When Do People 
Rely on Affective and Cognitive Feelings in Judgment? A Review,” 
Personality and Social Psychology Review! 5 (2011): 107-41. 
affect their cardiac health: Alexander Rotliman and Norbert Schwarz, 
“Constructing Perceptions of Vulnerability: Personal Relevance and the 
Use of Experimental Information in Health Judgments,” Personality and 
Social Psychology Bulletin 24 (1998): 1053-64. 

effortful task at the same time: Rainer Greifeneder and Herbert Bless, 
“Relying on Accessible Content Versus Accessibility Experiences: The 
Case of Processing Capacity,” Social Cognition 25 (2007): 853-81. 
happy episode in their life: Markus Ruder and Herbert Bless, “Mood and 
the Reliance on the Ease of Retrieval Heuristic,” Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology 85 (2003): 20-32. 

low on a depression scale: Rainer Greifeneder and Herbert Bless, 
“Depression and Reliance on Ease-of-Retrieval Experiences,” European 
Journal of Social Psychology 38 (2008): 213-30. 
knovJedgeable novices: Chezy Ofir et al., “Memory-Based Store Price 
Judgments: The Role of Knowledge and Shopping Experience,” Journal of 
Retailing 84 (2008): 414-23. 

true experts: Eugene M. Caruso, “Use of Experienced Retrieval Ease in 
Self and Social Judgments,” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 
44 (2008): 148-55. 

faith in intuition: Johannes Keller and Herbert Bless, “Predicting Future 
Affective States: How Ease of Retrieval and Faith in Intuition Moderate the 
Impact of Activated Content,” European Journal of Social Psychology 38 
(2008): 1-10. 

if they are.. .powerful: Mario Weick and Ana Guinote, “When Subjective 
Experiences Matter: Power Increases Reliance on the Ease of Retrieval,” 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 94 (2008): 956-70. 

13: Availability, Emotion, and Risk 

because of brain damage: Damasio’s idea is known as the “somatic 
marker hypothesis” and it has gathered substantial support: Antonio R. 



Damasio, Descartes’ Error: Emotion, Reason, and the Human Brain 
(New York: Putnam, 1994). Antonio R. Damasio, “The Somatic Marker 
Hypothesis and the Possible Functions of the Prefrontal Cortex,” 
Philosophical Transactions: Biological Sciences 351 (1996): 141-20. 
risks of each technology: Finucane et al., “The Affect Heuristic in 
Judgments of Risks and Benefits.” Paul Slovic, Melissa Finucane, Ellen 
Peters, and Donald G. MacGregor, “The Affect Heuristic,” in Thomas 
Gilovich, Dale Griffin, and Daniel Kahneman, eds., Heuristics and Biases 
(New York: Cambridge University Press, 2002), 397-420. Paul Slovic, 
Melissa Finucane, Ellen Peters, and Donald G. MacGregor, “Risk as 
Analysis and Risk as Feelings: Some Thoughts About Affect, Reason, 
Risk, and Rationality,” Risk Analysis 24 (2004): 1-12. Paul Slovic, “Trust, 
Emotion, Sex, Politics, and Science: Surveying the Risk-Assessment 
Battlefield,” Risk Analysis 19 (1999): 689-701. 

British Toxicology Society: Slovic, “Trust, Emotion, Sex, Politics, and 
Science.” The technologies and substances used in these studies are not 
alternative solutions to the same problem. In realistic problems, where 
competitive solutions are considered, the correlation between costs and 
benefits must be negative; the solutions that have {ns problems,the largest 
benefits are also the most costly. Whether laypeople and even experts 
might fail to recognize the correct relationship even in those cases is an 
interesting question. 

“mgs the rational dog’ 1 . Jonathan Haidt, “The Emotional Dog and Its 
Rational Tail: A Social Institutionist Approach to Moral Judgment,” 
Psychological Review'\08 (2001): 814-34. 

‘“Risk’does not exist’: Paul Slovic, The Perception of Risk (Sterling, VA: 
EarthScan, 2000). 

availability cascade: Timur Kuran and Cass R. Sunstein, “Availability 
Cascades and Risk Regulation,” Stanford LawReview5'\ (1999): 683- 
7 6 8. CERCLA, the Comprehensive Environmental Response, 
Compensation, and Liability Act, passed in 1980. 
nothing in betrnen: Paul Slovic, who testified for the apple growers in the 
Alar case, has a rather different view: “The scare was triggered by the 
CBS 60 Minutes broadcast that said 4, 000 children will die of cancer (no 
probabilities there) along with frightening pictures of bald children in a 
cancer ward—and many more incorrect statements. Also the story 
exposed EPA’s lack of competence in attending to and evaluating the 
safety of Alar, destroying trust in regulatory control. Given this, I think the 
public’s response was rational.” (Personal communication, May 11,2011.) 

14: Tom W’s Specialty 



“a shy poetry lover 11 . I borrowed this example from Max H. Bazerman and 
Don A. Moore, Judgment in Managerial Decision Making (New York: 
Wiley, 2008). 

always weighted more: Jonathan St. B. T. Evans, “Heuristic and Analytic 
Processes in Reasoning,” British Journal of Psychology 75 (1984): 451- 
68 . 

the opposite effect Norbert Schwarz et al., “Base Rates, 
Representativeness, and the Logic of Conversation: The Contextual 
Relevance of‘Irrelevant’ Information,” Social Cognition 9 (1991): 67-84. 
told to frowr. Alter, Oppenheimer, Epley, and Eyre, “Overcoming Intuition.” 
Bayes’s rule: The simplest form of Bayes’s rule is in odds form, posterior 
odds = prior odds * likelihood ratio, where the posterior odds are the odds 
(the ratio of probabilities) for two competing hypotheses. Consider a 
problem of diagnosis. Your friend has tested positive for a serious 
disease. The disease is rare: only 1 in 600 of the cases sent in for testing 
actually has the disease. The test is fairly accurate. Its likelihood ratio is 
25:1, which means that the probability that a person who has the disease 
will test positive is 25 times higher than the probability of a false positive. 
Testing positive is frightening news, but the odds that your friend has the 
disease have risen only from 1/600 to 25/600, and the probability is 4%. 

For the hypothesis that Tom W is a computer scientist, the prior odds 
that correspond to a base rate of 3% are (.03/. 97 = .031). Assuming a 
likelihood ratio of 4 (the description is 4 times as likely if Tom W is a 
computer scientist than if he is not), the posterior odds are 4 * . 031 = 
12.4. From these odds you can { odes as I compute that the posterior 
probability of Tom W being a computer scientist is now 11% (because 
12.4/112.4 = .11). 


15: Linda: Less is More 

the role of heuristics: Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman, “Extensional 
Versus Intuitive Reasoning: The Conjunction Fallacy in Probability 
Judgment,” Psychological Rewew90(1983), 293-315. 

“a little homunculus ’! Stephen Jay Gould, Bully for Brontosaurus (New 
York: Norton, 1991). 

weakened or explained: See, among others, Ralph Hertwig and Gerd 
Gigerenzer, “The ‘Conjunction Fallacy’ Revisited: How Intelligent Inferences 
Look Like Reasoning Errors,” Journal of Behavioral Decision Making 12 
(1999): 275-305; Ralph Hertwig, Bjoern Benz, and Stefan Krauss, “The 
Conjunction Fallacy and the Many Meanings of And,” Cognition 108 



(2008): 740-53. 

settle our differences: Barbara Mellers, Ralph Hertwig, and Daniel 
Kahneman, “Do Frequency Representations Eliminate Conjunction 
Effects? An Exercise in Adversarial Collaboration,” Psychological 
Science 12 (2001): 269-75. 

16: Causes Trump Statistics 

correct answer is 41%: Applying Bayes’s rule in odds form, the prior odds 
are the odds for the Blue cab from the base rate, and the likelihood ratio is 
the ratio of the probability of the witness saying the cab is Blue if it is Blue, 
divided by the probability of the witness saying the cab is Blue if it is 
Green: posterior odds = (.15/.85) x (.80/.20) = .706. The odds are the ratio 
of the probability that the cab is Blue, divided by the probability that the cab 
is Green. To obtain the probability that the cab is Blue, we compute: 
Probability (Blue) = .706/1. 706 = .41. The probability that the cab is Blue 
is 41%. 

not too far from the Bayesian: Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman, 
“Causal Schemas in Judgments Under Uncertainty,” in Progress in Social 
Psychology, ed. Morris Fishbein (Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum, 1980), 49-72. 
University of Michigan: Richard E. Nisbett and Eugene Borgida, 
“Attribution and the Psychology of Prediction,” Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology 32 (1975): 932-43. 

relieved of responsibility. John M. Darley and Bibb Latane, “Bystander 
Intervention in Emergencies: Diffusion of Responsibility,” Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology 8 (1968): 377-83. 

17: Regression to the Mean 

help of the most brilliant statisticians: Michael Bulmer, Francis Galton: 
Pioneer of Heredity and Biometry (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University 
Press, 2003). 

standard scores: Researchers transform each original score into a 
standard score by subtracting the mean and dividing the result by the 
standard deviation. Standard scores have a mean of zero and a standard 
deviation of 1, can be compared across variables (especially when the 
statistica {he deviatiol distributions of the original scores are similar), and 
have many desirable mathematical properties, which Galton had to work 
out to understand the nature of correlation and regression. 
correlation between parent and child: This will not be true in an 



environment in which some children are malnourished. Differences in 
nutrition will become important, the proportion of shared factors will 
diminish, and with it the correlation between the height of parents and the 
height of children (unless the parents of malnourished children were also 
stunted by hunger in childhood). 

height and weight The correlation was computed for a very large sample 
of the population of the United States (the Gallup-Healthways Well-Being 
Index). 

income and education: The correlation appears impressive, but I was 
surprised to learn many years ago from the sociologist Christopher Jencks 
that if everyone had the same education, the inequality of income 
(measured by standard deviation) would be reduced only by about 9%. 
The relevant formula is v (1—r 2 ), where ris the correlation. 
correlation and regression: This is true when both variables are measured 
in standard scores—that is, where each score is transformed by removing 
the mean and dividing the result by the standard deviation. 
confusing mere correlation wth causation: Howard Wainer, “The Most 
Dangerous Equation,” American Scientist 95 (2007): 249-56. 

18: Taming Intuitive Predictions 

far more moderate: The proof of the standard regression as the optimal 
solution to the prediction problem assumes that errors are weighted by the 
squared deviation from the correct value. This is the least-squares 
criterion, which is commonly accepted. Other loss functions lead to 
different solutions. 

19: The Illusion of Understanding 

narrative fallacy: Nassim Nicholas Taleb, The Black Sv\an: The Impact of 
the Highly Improbable (New York: Random House, 2007). 
one attribute that is particularly significant . 

throwng the ball: Michael Lewis, Moneyball: The Art of Winning an Unfair 
Game (New York: Norton, 2003). 

sell their company. Seth Weintraub, “Excite Passed Up Buying Google for 
$750,000 in 1999,” Fortune, September 29,2011. 
ever felt differently: Richard E. Nisbett and Timothy D. Wilson, “Telling 
More Than We Can Know: Verbal Reports on Mental Processes,” 
Psychological Review84 (1977): 231-59. 

United States and the Soviet Union: Baruch Fischhoff and Ruth Beyth, “I 



Knew tt Would Happen: Remembered Probabilities of Once Future 
Things,” Organizational Behavior and Human Performance 13 (1975): 1- 
16. 

quality of a decision : Jonathan Baron and John C. Hershey, “Outcome 
Bias in Decision {s iiv&gt; Evaluation,” Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology 54 (1988): 569-79. 

should have hired the monitor. Kim A. Kamin and Jeffrey Rachlinski, “Ex 
Post? Ex Ante: Determining Liability in Hindsight,” Law and Human 
Behavior 19 (1995): 89-104. Jeffrey J. Rachlinski, “A Positive 
Psychological Theory of Judging in Hindsight,” University of Chicago Law 
Review65 (1998): 571-625. 

tidbit of intelligence: Jeffrey Goldberg, “Letter from Washington: 
Woodward vs. Tenet,” New Yorker, May 21, 2007, 35-38. Also Tim 
Weiner, Legacy of Ashes: The History of the CIA (New \brk: Doubleday, 
2007); “Espionage: Inventing the Dots,” Economist, November 3, 2007, 
100 . 

reluctance to take risks: Philip E. Tetlock, “Accountability: The Neglected 
Social Context of Judgment and Choice,” Research in Organizational 
Behavior7 (1985): 297-332. 

before their current appointment Marianne Bertrand and Antoinette 
Schoar, “Managing with Style: The Effect of Managers on Firm Policies,” 
Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (2003): 1169-1208. Nick Bloom and 
John Van Reenen, “Measuring and Explaining Management Practices 
Across Firms and Countries,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 
(2007): 1351-1408. 

“Howoften wll you find.. I am indebted to Professor James H. Steiger of 
Vanderbilt University, who developed an algorithm that answers this 
question, under plausible assumptions. Steiger’s analysis shows that 
correlations of .20 and .40 are associated, respectively, with inversion 
rates of 43% and 37%. 

his penetrating book: The Halo Effect was praised as one of the best 
business books of the year by both the Financial Times and The Wall 
Street Journal: Phil Rosenzweig, The Halo Effect:.. .and the Eight Other 
Business Delusions That Deceive Managers (New York: Simon &amp; 
Schuster, 2007). See also Paul Oik and Phil Rosenzweig, “The Halo Effect 
and the Challenge of Management Inquiry: A Dialog Between Phil 
Rosenzweig and Paul Oik,” Journal of Management Inquiry 19 (2010): 
48-54. 

“a visionary company '! James C. Collins and Jerry I. Porras, Built to Last: 
Successful Habits of Visionary Companies (New York: Harper, 2002). 



flip of a coirr. In fact, even if you were the CEO yourself, your forecasts 
would not be impressively reliable; the extensive research on insider 
trading shows that executives do beat the market when they trade their 
own stock, but the margin of their outperformance is barely enough to 
cover the costs of trading. See H. Nejat Seyhun, “The Information Content 
of Aggregate Insider Trading,” Journal of Business 61 (1988): 1-24; Josef 
Lakonishok and Inmoo Lee, “Are Insider Trades Informative?” Review of 
Financial Studies 14 (2001): 79-111; Zahid Iqbal and Shekar Shetty, “An 
Investigation of Causality Between Insider Transactions and Stock 
Returns,” Quarterly Review of Economics and Finance 42 (2002): 41-57. 
In Search of Excellence: Rosenz {lenlatweig, The Halo Effect. 

“MostAdmired Companies”: Deniz Anginer, Kenneth L. Fisher, and Meir 
Statman, “Stocks of Admired Companies and Despised Ones,” working 
paper, 2007. 

regression to the mean: Jason Zweig observes that the lack of 
appreciation for regression has detrimental implications for the recruitment 
of CEOs. Struggling firms tend to turn to outsiders, recruiting CEOs from 
companies with high recent returns. The incoming CEO then gets credit, at 
least temporarily, for his new firm’s subsequent improvement. (Mean-while, 
his replacement at his former firm is now struggling, leading the new 
bosses to believe that they definitely hired “the right guy.”) Anytime a CEO 
jumps ship, the new company must buy out his stake (in stock and options) 
at his old firm, setting a baseline for future compensation that has nothing 
to do with performance at the new firm. Tens of millions of dollars in 
compensation get awarded for “personal” achievements that are driven 
mainly by regression and halo effects (personal communication, 
December 29, 2009). 

20: The Illusion of Validity 

this startling conclusion: Brad M. Barber and Terrance Odean, “Trading Is 
Hazardous to Your Wealth: The Common Stock Investment Performance of 
Individual Investors,” Journal of Finance 55 (2002): 773-806. 
men acted on their useless ideas: Brad M. Barber and Terrance Odean, 
“Boys Will Be Boys: Gender, Overconfidence, and Common Stock 
Investment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 116 (2006): 261-92. 
selling “wnners* This “disposition effect" is discussed further . 
responding to news: Brad M. Barber and Terrance Odean, “All That 
Glitters: The Effect of Attention and News on the Buying Behavior of 
Individual and Institutional Investors,” Review of Financial Studies 21 
(2008): 785-818. 



v\ealth from amateurs: Research on stock trades in Taiwan concluded that 
the transfer of wealth from individuals to financial institutions amounts to a 
staggering 2.2% of GDP: Brad M. Barber, Yi-Tsung Lee, Yu-Jane Liu, and 
Terrance Odean, “Just How Much Do Individual Investors Lose by 
Trading?” Reviewof Financial Studies 22 (2009): 609-32. 
underperform the overall market. John C. Bogle, Common Sense on 
Mutual Funds: New Imperatives for the Intelligent Investor (New York: 
Wiley, 2000), 213. 

persistent differences in skill: Mark Grinblatt and Sheridan Tltman, “The 
Persistence of Mutual Fund Performance,” Journal of Finance 42 (1992): 
1977-84. Edwin J. Elton et al., “The Persistence of Risk-Adjusted Mutual 
Fund Performance,” Journal of Business 52 (1997): 1-33. Edwin Elton et 
al., “Efficiency With Costly Information: A Re-interpretation of Evidence 
from Managed Portfolios,” Reviewof Financial Studies 6 (1993): 1-21. 

“In this age of academic hyperspecialization ’! Philip E. Tetlock, Expert 
Political Judgments How Good is It? How Can We KnoW? (Princeton: 
Princeton University Press, 2005), 233. 

21: Intuitions vs. Formulas 

“There is no controversy’ 1 . Paul Meehl, “Causes and Effects of My 
Disturbing Little Book,” Journal of Personality Assessment 50 (1986): 
370-75. 

a factor of 10 or more: During the 1990-1991 auction season, for 
example, the price in London of a case of 1960 Chateau Latour averaged 
$464; a case of the 1961 vintage (one of the best ever) fetched an 
average of $5,432. 

Experienced radiologists: Paul J. Hoffman, Paul Slovic, and Leonard G. 
Rorer, “An Analysis-of-Variance Model for the Assessment of Configural 
Cue Utilization in Clinical Judgment,” Psychological Bulletin 69 (1968): 
338-39. 

internal corporate audits: Paul R. Brown, “Independent Auditor Judgment 
in the Evaluation of Internal Audit Functions,” Journal of Accounting 
Research 21 (1983): 444-55. 

41 separate studies: James Shanteau, “Psychological Characteristics and 
Strategies of Expert Decision Makers,” Acta Psychologica 68 (1988): 
203-15. 

successive food breaks: Danziger, Levav, and Avnaim-Pesso, 
“Extraneous Factors in Judicial Decisions.” 

loviering validity. Richard A. DeVaul et al., “Medical-School Performance 



of Initially Rejected Students,” JAMA 257 (1987): 47-51. Jason Dana and 
Robyn M. Dawes, “Belief in the Unstructured Interview: The Persistence of 
an Illusion,” working paper, Department of Psychology, University of 
Pennsylvania, 2011. William M. Grove et al., “Clinical Versus Mechanical 
Prediction: A Meta-Analysis,” Psychological Assessment 12 (2000): 19- 
30. 

Dawes’s famous article: Robyn M. Dawes, “The Robust Beauty of 
Improper Linear Models in Decision Making,” American Psychologist 34 
(1979): 571-82. 

not affected by accidents of sampling: Jason Dana and Robyn M. Dawes, 
“The Superiority of Simple Alternatives to Regression for Social Science 
Predictions,” Journal of Educational and Behavioral Statistics 29 (2004): 
317-31. 

Dr. Apgar. Virginia Apgar, “A Proposal for a New Method of Evaluation of 
the Newborn Infant,” Current Researches in Anesthesia and Analgesia 32 
(1953): 260-67. Mieczyslaw Finster and Margaret Wood, “The Apgar 
Score Has Survived the Test of Time,” Anesthesiology 102 (2005): 855- 
57. 

virtues of checklists: Atul Gawande, The Checklist Manifesto: Howto Get 
Things Right (New York: Metropolitan Books, 2009). 
organic fruit Paul Rozin, “The Meaning of ‘Natural’: Process More 
Important than Content,” Psychological Science 16 (2005): 652-58. 

2{ce 

moderated by an arbiter. Mellers, Hertwig, and Kahneman, “Do Frequency 
Representations Eliminate Conjunction Effects?” 
articulated this position: Klein, Sources ofPover. 
kouros: The Getty Museum in Los Angeles brings in the world’s leading 
experts on Greek sculpture to view a kouros—a marble statue of a striding 
boy—that it is about to buy. One after another, the experts react with what 
one calls “intuitive repulsion”—a powerful hunch that the kouros is not 
2,500 years old but a modern fake. None of the experts can immediately 
say why they think the sculpture is a forgery. The closest any of them could 
come to a rationale is an Italian art historian’s complaint that something— 
he does not know exactly what—“seemed wrong” with the statue’s 
fingernails. A famous American expert said that the first thought that came 
to his mind was the word fresh, and a Greek expert flatly stated, “Anyone 
who has ever seen a sculpture coming out of the ground could tell that that 
thing has never been in the ground.” The lack of agreement on the reasons 
for the shared conclusion is striking, and rather suspect. 



admired as a hero: Simon was one of the towering intellectual figures of 
the twentieth century. He wrote a classic on decision making in 
organizations while still in his twenties, and among many other 
achievements he went on to be one of the founders of the field of artificial 
intelligence, a leader in cognitive science, an influential student of the 
process of scientific discovery, a forerunner of behavioral economics and, 
almost incidentally, a Nobel laureate in economics. 

“nothing less than recognition ’! Simon, “What Is an Explanation of 
Behavior?” David G. Myers, Intuition: Its Powers and Perils (New Haven: 
Yale University Press, 2002), 56. 

“without knowng howhe knows’ 1 . Seymour Epstein, “Demystifying Intuition: 
What It Is, What It Does, How It Does It,” Psychological Inquiry 21 (2010): 
295-312. 

10,000 hours: Foer, Moonwalking with Einstein. 

23: The Outside View 

inside view and the outside view. The labels are often misunderstood. 
Numerous authors believed that the correct terms were “insider view” and 
“outsider view,” which are not even close to what we had in mind. 
very different answers: Dan Lovallo and Daniel Kahneman, “Timid 
Choices and Bold Forecasts: A Cognitive Perspective on Risk Taking,” 
Management Science 39 (1993): 17-31. Daniel Kahneman and Dan 
Lovallo, “Delusions of Success: How Optimism Undermines Executives’ 
Decisions,” Harvard Business Review81 (2003): 56-63. 

“Pallid” statistical information: Richard E. Nisbett and Lee D. Ross, 
Human Inference: Strategies and Shortcomings of Social Judgment 
(Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1980). 

impersonality of procedures: Fo {i &gt;How Doctors Think (New York: 
Mariner Books, 2008), 6. 

planning fallacy. Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky, “Intuitive 
Prediction: Biases and Corrective Procedures,” Management Science 12 
(1979): 313-27. 

Scottish Parliament building: Rt. Hon. The Lord Fraser of Carmyllie, “The 
Holyrood Inquiry, Final Report,” September 8, 2004, 

www.holvroodinquirv.ora/FINAL re do rt/re port.htm . 
did not become more reliant on it. Brent Flyvbjerg, Mette K. Skamris 
Holm, and Soren L. Buhl, “How (In)accurate Are Demand Forecasts in 
Public Works Projects?” Journal of the American Planning Association 
71 (2005): 131-46. 



survey of American homeowiers : “2002 Cost vs. Value Report,” 
Remodeling, November 20,2002. 

completion times : Brent Flyvbjerg, “From Nobel Prize to Project 
Management: Getting Risks Right,” Project Management Journal 37 
(2006): 5-15. 

sunk-cost fallacy. Hal R. Arkes and Catherine Blumer, “The Psychology of 
Sunk Cost,” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 35 
(1985): 124-40. Hal R. Arkes and Peter Ayton, “The Sunk Cost and 
Concorde Effects: Are Humans Less Rational Than Lower Animals?” 
Psychological Bulletin 125 (1998): 591-600. 

24: The Engine of Capitalism 

you already feel fortunate: Miriam A. Mosing et al., “Genetic and 
Environmental Influences on Optimism and Its Relationship to Mental and 
Self-Rated Health: A Study of Aging Twins,” Behavior Genetics 39 (2009): 
597-604. David Snowdon, Aging wth Grace: What the Nun Study 
Teaches Us About Leading Longer, Healthier, and More Meaningful 
Lives (New York: Bantam Books, 2001). 

bright side of everything: Elaine Fox, Anna Ridgewell, and Chris Ashwin, 
“Looking on the Bright Side: Biased Attention and the Human Serotonin 
Transporter Gene,” Proceedings of the Royal Society B 276 (2009): 
1747-51. 

“triumph of hope over experience’ 1 . Manju Puri and David T. Robinson, 
“Optimism and Economic Choice,” Journal of Financial Economics 86 
(2007): 71-99. 

more sanguine than midlevel managers: Lowell W. Busenitz and Jay B. 
Barney, “Differences Between Entrepreneurs and Managers in Large 
Organizations: Biases and Heuristics in Strategic Decision-Making,” 
Journal of Business Venturing 12 (1997): 9-30. 

admiration of others: Entrepreneurs who have failed are sustained in their 
confidence by the probably mistaken belief that they have learned a great 
deal from the experience. Gavin Cassar and Justin Craig, “An Investigation 
of Hindsight Bias in Nascent Venture Activity,” Journal of Business 
Venturing 24 ({&gt; 

influence on the lives of others: Keith M. Hmieleski and Robert A. Baron, 
“Entrepreneurs’ Optimism and New Venture Performance: A Social 
Cognitive Perspective,” Academy of Management Journal 52 (2009): 
473-88. Matthew L. A. Hayward, Dean A. Shepherd, and Dale Griffin, “A 
Hubris Theory of Entrepreneurship,” Management Science 52 (2006): 



160-72. 

chance of failing ms zero : Arnold C. Cooper, Carolyn Y Woo, and 

William C. Dunkelberg, “Entrepreneurs’ Perceived Chances for Success,” 

Journal of Business Venturing 3 (1988): 97-108. 

given the lomst grade: Thomas Astebro and Samir Elhedhli, “The 

Effectiveness of Simple Decision Heuristics: Forecasting Commercial 

Success for Early-Stage Ventures,” Management Science 52 (2006): 

395-409. 

widespread, stubborn, and costly: Thomas Astebro, “The Return to 
Independent Invention: Evidence of Unrealistic Optimism, Risk Seeking or 
Skewness Loving?” Economic Journal 113 (2003): 226-39. 
bet small amounts of money: Eleanor F. Williams and Thomas Gilovich, 
“Do People Really Believe They Are Above Average?” Journal of 
Experimental Social Psychology 44 (2008): 1121-28. 

“hubris hypothesis’ 1 . Richard Roll, “The Hubris Hypothesis of Corporate 
Takeovers,” Journal of Business 59 (1986): 197-216, part 1. This 
remarkable early article presented a behavioral analysis of mergers and 
acquisitions that abandoned the assumption of rationality, long before such 
analyses became popular. 

“value-destroying mergers’ ! Ulrike Malmendier and Geoffrey Tate, “Who 
Makes Acquisitions? CEO Overconfidence and the Market’s Reaction,” 
Journal of Financial Economics 89 (2008): 20-43. 

“engage in earnings management’ 1 . Ulrike Malmendier and Geoffrey Tate, 
“Superstar CEOs,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 24 (2009), 1593- 
1638. 

self-aggrandizement to a cognitive bias: Paul D. Windschitl, Jason P. 
Rose, Michael T. Stalk-fleet, and Andrew R. Smith, “Are People Excessive 
or Judicious in Their Egocentrism? A Modeling Approach to 
Understanding Bias and Accuracy in People’s Optimism,” Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology 95 (2008): 252-73. 
average outcome is a loss: A form of competition neglect has also been 
observed in the time of day at which sellers on eBay choose to end their 
auctions. The easy question is: At what time is the total number of bidders 
the highest? Answer: around 7:00 p.m. EST. The question sellers should 
answer is harder: Considering how many other sellers end their auctions 
during peak hours, at what time will there be the most bidders looking at 
my auction? The answer: around noon, when the number of bidders is 
large relative to the number of sellers. The sellers who remember the 
competition and avoid prime time get higher prices. Uri Simonsohn, 
“eBay’s Crowded Evenings: Competition Neglect in Market Entry 
Decisions,” Management Science 56 (2010): 1060-73. 



“diagnosis antemortem’ 1 . Eta S. Berner and Mark L. Graber, 
“Overconfidence as a Cause of Diagnostic Error in Medicine,” American 
Journal of Medicine 121 (2008): S2-S23. 

“disclosing uncertainty to patients’ ! Pat Croskerry and Geoff Norman, 
“Overconfidence in Clinical Decision Making,” American Journal of 
Medicine 121 (2008): S24-S29. 

background of risk taking : Kahneman and Lovallo, “Timid Choices and 
Bold Forecasts.” 

Royal Dutch Shell : J. Edward Russo and Paul J. H. Schoemaker, 
“Managing Overconfidence,” Sloan Management Review33 (1992): 7- 
17. 


25: Bernoulli’s Errors 

Mathematical Psychology: Clyde H. Coombs, Robyn M. Dawes, and Amos 
Tversky, Mathematical Psychology: An Elementary Introduction 
(Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1970). 

for the rich and for the poor. This rule applies approximately to many 
dimensions of sensation and perception. It is known as Weber’s law, after 
the German physiologist Ernst Heinrich Weber, who discovered it. Fechner 
drew on Weber’s law to derive the logarithmic psychophysical function. 

$10 million from $100 million: Bernoulli’s intuition was correct, and 
economists still use the log of income or wealth in many contexts. For 
example, when Angus Deaton plotted the average life satisfaction of 
residents of many countries against the GDP of these countries, he used 
the logarithm of GDP as a measure of income. The relationship, it turns 
out, is extremely close: Residents of high-GDP countries are much more 
satisfied with the quality of their lives than are residents of poor countries, 
and a doubling of income yields approximately the same increment of 
satisfaction in rich and poor countries alike. 

“St. Petersburg paradox’ 1 . Nicholas Bernoulli, a cousin of Daniel Bernoulli, 
asked a question that can be paraphrased as follows: “You are invited to a 
game in which you toss a coin repeatedly. You receive $2 if it shows 
heads, and the prize doubles with every successive toss that shows heads. 
The game ends when the coin first shows tails. How much would you pay 
for an opportunity to play that game?” People do not think the gamble is 
worth more than a few dollars, although its expected value is infinite— 
because the prize keeps growing, the expected value is $1 for each toss, 
to infinity. However, the utility of the prizes grows much more slowly, which 
explains why the gamble is not attractive. 

“history of one’s wealth’ 1 . Other factors contributed to the longevity of 



Bernoulli’s theory. One is that it is natural to formulate choices between 
gambles in terms of gains, or mixed gains and losses. Not many people 
thought about choices in which all options are bad, although we were by no 
means the first to observe risk seeking. Another fact that favors Bernoulli’s 
theory is that thinking in terms of final states o
f wealth and ignoring the past 
is often a very reasonable thing to do. Economists were traditionally 
concerned with rational choices, and Bernoulli’s model suited their goal. 

26: Prospect Theory 

ast="2%"&gt; 

subjective value of v\ealth: Stanley S. Stevens, “To Honor Fechner and 
Repeal His Law,” Science 133 (1961): 80-86. Stevens, Psychophysics. 
The three principles: Writing this sentence reminded me that the graph of 
the value function has already been used as an emblem. Every Nobel 
laureate receives an individual certificate with a personalized drawing, 
which is presumably chosen by the committee. My illustration was a 
stylized rendition of figure 10. 

“loss aversion ratio’ 1 . The loss aversion ratio is often found to be in the 
range of 1. 5 and 2.5: Nathan Novemsky and Daniel Kahneman, “The 
Boundaries of Loss Aversion,” Journal of Marketing Research 42 (2005): 
119-28. 

emotional reaction to losses: Peter Sokol-Hessner et al., “Thinking Like a 
Trader Selectively Reduces Individuals’ Loss Aversion,” PNAS 106 
(2009): 5035—40. 

Rabin’s theorem: For several consecutive years, I gave a guest lecture in 
the introductory finance class of my colleague Burton Malkiel. I discussed 
the implausibility of Bernoulli’s theory each year. I noticed a distinct change 
in my colleague’s attitude when I first mentioned Rabin’s proof. He was 
now prepared to take the conclusion much more seriously than in the past. 
Mathematical arguments have a definitive quality that is more compelling 
than appeals to common sense. Economists are particularly sensitive to 
this advantage. 

rejects that gamble: The intuition of the proof can be illustrated by an 
example. Suppose an individual’s wealth is W, and she rejects a gamble 
with equal probabilities to win $11 or lose $10. If the utility function for 
wealth is concave (bent down), the preference implies that the value of $1 
has decreased by over 9% over an interval of $21! This is an 
extraordinarily steep decline and the effect increases steadily as the 
gambles become more extreme. 

“Even a lousy lawyer’ 1 . Matthew Rabin, “Risk Aversion and Expected-Utility 
Theory: A Calibration Theorem,” Econometrica 68 (2000): 1281-92. 



Matthew Rabin and Richard H. Thaler, “Anomalies: Risk Aversion,” 
Journal of Economic Perspectives 15 (2001): 219-32. 
economists and psychologists : Several theorists have proposed versions 
of regret theories that are built on the idea that people are able to 
anticipate how their future experiences will be affected by the options that 
did not materialize and/or by the choices they did not make: David E. Bell, 
“Regret in Decision Making Under Uncertainty,” Operations Research 30 
(1982): 961-81. Graham Loomes and Robert Sugden, “Regret Theory: An 
Alternative to Rational Choice Under Uncertainty,” Economic Journal 92 
(1982): 805-25. Barbara A. Mellers, “Choice and the Relative Pleasure of 
Consequences,” Psychological Bulletin 126 (2000): 910-24. Barbara A. 
Mellers, Alan Schwartz, and liana Ritov, “Emotion-Based Choice,” Journal 
of Experimental Psychology—General 128 (1999): 332-45. Decision 
makers’ choices between gambles depend on whether they expect to 
know the outcome of the gamble they did not choose, liana Ritov, 
“Probability of Regret: Anticipation of Uncertainty Resolution in Choice,” 
Organiz {an&gt;y did not ational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 
66 (1966): 228-36. 

27: The Endowment Effect 

What is missing from the figure: A theoretical analysis that assumes loss 
aversion predicts a pronounced kink of the indifference curve at the 
reference point: Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman, “Loss Aversion in 
Riskless Choice: A Reference-Dependent Model,” Quarterly Journal of 
Economics 106 (1991): 1039-61. Jack Knetsch observed these kinks in 
an experimental study: “Preferences and Nonreversibility of Indifference 
Curves,” Journal of Economic Behavior &amp; Organization 17 (1992): 1 SI- 
39. 

period of one year. Alan B. Krueger and Andreas Mueller, “Job Search 
and Job Finding in a Period of Mass Unemployment: Evidence from High- 
Frequency Longitudinal Data,” working paper, Princeton University 
Industrial Relations Section, January 2011. 

did not owi the bottle: Technically, the theory allows the buying price to be 
slightly lower than the selling price because of what economists call an 
“income effect”: The buyer and the seller are not equally wealthy, because 
the seller has an extra bottle. However, the effect in this case is negligible 
since $50 is a minute fraction of the professor’s wealth. The theory would 
predict that this income effect would not change his willingness to pay by 
even a penny. 

would be puzzled by it The economist Alan Krueger reported on a study 



he conducted on the occasion of taking his father to the Super Bowl: “We 
asked fans who had won the right to buy a pair of tickets for $325 or $400 
each in a lottery whether they would have been willing to pay $3,000 a 
ticket if they had lost in the lottery and whether they would have sold their 
tickets if someone had offered them $3,000 apiece. Ninety-four percent 
said they would not have bought for $3,000, and ninety-two percent said 
they would not have sold at that price.” He concludes that “rationality was in 
short supply at the Super Bowl.” Alan B. Krueger, “Supply and Demand: An 
Economist Goes to the Super Bowl,” Milken Institute Review. A Journal of 
Economic Policy 3 (2001): 22-29. 

giving up a bottle of nice wne: Strictly speaking, loss aversion refers to 
the anticipated pleasure and pain, which determine choices. These 
anticipations could be wrong in some cases. Deborah A. Kermer et al., 
“Loss Aversion Is an Affective Forecasting Error,” Psychological Science 
17 (2006): 649-53. 

market transactions: Novemskyand Kahneman, “The Boundaries of Loss 
Aversion.” 

half of the tokens wll change hands: Imagine that all the participants are 
ordered in a line by the redemption value assigned to them. Now randomly 
allocate tokens to half the individuals in the line. Half of the people in the 
front of the line will not have a token, and half of the people at the end of the 
line will own one. These people (half of the total) are expected to move by 
trading places with each other, so that in the end everyone in the first half of 
the line has a token, and no one behind them does. 

Brain recordings: Brian Knutson et al., “Neural Antecedents of the 
Endowment Effect,” Neuron 58 (2008): 814-22. Brian Knutson an {an 
utson et ad Stephanie M. Greer, “Anticipatory Affect: Neural Correlates 
and Consequences for Choice,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal 
Society B 363 (2008): 3771-86. 

riskless and risky decisions: A review of the price of risk, based on 
“international data from 16 different countries during over 100 years,” 
yielded an estimate of 2.3, “in striking agreement with estimates obtained 
in the very different methodology of laboratory experiments of individual 
decision-making”: Moshe Levy, “Loss Aversion and the Price of Risk,” 
Quantitative Finance 10 (2010): 1009-22. 

effect of price increases: Miles O. Bidwel, Bruce X. Wang, and J. Douglas 
Zona, “An Analysis of Asymmetric Demand Response to Price Changes: 
The Case of Local Telephone Calls,” Journal of Regulatory Economics 8 
(1995): 285-98. Bruce G. S. Hardie, Eric J. Johnson, and Peter S. Fader, 
“Modeling Loss Aversion and Reference Dependence Effects on Brand 
Choice,” Marketing Science 12 (1993): 378-94. 



illustrate the power of these concepts: Colin Camerer, “Three Cheers— 
Psychological, Theoretical, Empirical—for Loss Aversion,” Journal of 
Marketing Research 42 (2005): 129-33. Colin F. Camerer, “Prospect 
Theory in the Wild: Evidence from the Field,” in Choices, Values, and 
Frames, ed. Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky (New \brk: Russell 
Sage Foundation, 2000), 288-300. 

condo apartments in Boston: David Genesove and Christopher Mayer, 
“Loss Aversion and Seller Behavior: Evidence from the Housing Market,” 
Quarterly Journal of Economics 116 (2001): 1233-60. 
effect of trading experience: John A. List, “Does Market Experience 
Eliminate Market Anomalies?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 
(2003): 47-71. 

Jack Knetsch also: Jack L. Knetsch, “The Endowment Effect and 
Evidence of Nonreversible Indifference Curves,” American Economic 
Review79 (1989): 1277-84. 

ongoing debate about the endowment effect Charles R. Plott and Kathryn 
Zeiler, “The Willingness to Pay-Willingness to Accept Gap, the 
‘Endowment Effect,’ Subject Misconceptions, and Experimental 
Procedures for Eliciting Valuations,” American Economic Review 95 
(2005): 530-45. Charles Plott, a leading experimental economist, has 
been very skeptical of the endowment effect and has attempted to show 
that it is not a “fundamental aspect of human preference” but rather an 
outcome of inferior technique. Plott and Zeiler believe that participants who 
show the endowment effect are under some misconception about what 
their true values are, and they modified the procedures of the original 
experiments to eliminate the misconceptions. They devised an elaborate 
training procedure in which the participants experienced the roles of both 
buyers and sellers, and were explicitly taught to assess their true values. 
As expected, the endowment effect disappeared. Plott and Zeiler view 
their method as an important improvement of technique. Psychologists 
would consider the method severely deficient, because it communicates to 
the participants a message of what the experimenters consider 
appropriate behavior, which happens to coincide with the experimenters’ 
theory. Plott and Zeiler’s favored version of Kne {ers): tsch’s exchange 
experiment is similarly biased: It does not allow the owner of the good to 
have physical possession of it, which is crucial to the effect. See Charles 
R. Plott and Kathryn Zeiler, “Exchange Asymmetries Incorrectly Interpreted 
as Evidence of Endowment Effect Theory and Prospect Theory?” 
American Economic Review 97 (2007): 1449-66. There may be an 
impasse here, where each side rejects the methods required by the other. 
People who are poor. In their studies of decision making under poverty, 



Eldar Shafir, Sendhil Mullainathan, and their colleagues have observed 
other instances in which poverty induces economic behavior that is in 
some respects more realistic and more rational than that of people who 
are better off. The poor are more likely to respond to real outcomes than to 
their description. Marianne Bertrand, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Eldar 
Shafir, “Behavioral Economics and Marketing in Aid of Decision Making 
Among the Poor,” Journal of Public Policy &amp; Marketing 25 (2006): 8-23. 
in the United States and in the UK: The conclusion that money spent on 
purchases is not experienced as a loss is more likely to be true for people 
who are relatively well-off. The key may be whether you are aware when 
you buy one good that you will not be unable to afford another good. 
Novemsky and Kahneman, “The Boundaries of Loss Aversion.” Ian 
Bateman et al., “Testing Competing Models of Loss Aversion: An 
Adversarial Collaboration,” Journal of Public Economics 89 (2005): 
1561-80. 


28: Bad Events 

heartbeat accelerated: Paul J. Whalen et al., “Human Amygdala 
Responsivity to Masked Fearful Eye Whites,” Science 306 (2004): 2061. 
Individuals with focal lesions of the amygdala showed little or no loss 
aversion in their risky choices: Benedetto De Martino, Colin F. Camerer, 
and Ralph Adolphs, “Amygdala Damage Eliminates Monetary Loss 
Aversion,” PNAS 107 (2010): 3788-92. 

bypassing the visual cortex: Joseph LeDoux, The Emotional Brain: The 
Mysterious Underpinnings of Emotional Life (New York: Touchstone, 
1996). 

processed faster. Elaine Fox et al., “Facial Expressions of Emotion: Are 
Angry Faces Detected More Efficiently?” Cognition &amp; Emotion 14 (2000): 
61-92. 

“pops out’ 1 . Christine Hansen and Ranald Hansen, “Finding the Face in the 
Crowd: An Anger Superiority Effect,” Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology 54 (1988): 917-24. 

“ acceptable/unacceptable ’! Jos J. A. Van Berkum et al., “Right or Wrong? 
The Brain’s Fast Response to Morally Objectionable Statements,” 
Psychological Science 20 (2009): 1092-99. 

negativity dominance: Paul Rozin and Edward B. Royzman, “Negativity 
Bias, Negativity Dominance, and Contagion,” Personality and Social 
Psychology Review5 (2001): 296-320. 

resistant to disconfirmation: Roy F. Baumeister, Ellen Bratslavsky, Catrin 



Finkenauer, and Kathleen D. Vohs, “Bad Is Stronger Than Good,” Review 
of General Psychology 5 (200 {/spFad): 323. 

biologically significant improvement Michel Cabanac, “Pleasure: The 
Common Currency,” Journal of Theoretical Biology 155 (1992): 173-200. 
not equally powerful: Chip Heath, Richard P. Larrick, and George Wu, 
“Goals as Reference Points,” Cognitive Psychology 38 (1999): 79-109. 
rain-drenched customers: Colin Camerer, Linda Babcock, George 
Loewenstein, and Richard Thaler, “Labor Supply of New York City 
Cabdrivers: One Day at a Time,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112 
(1997): 407-41. The conclusions of this research have been questioned: 
Henry S. Farber, “Is Tomorrow Another Day? The Labor Supply of New 
York Cab Drivers,” NBER Working Paper 9706, 2003. A series of studies 
of bicycle messengers in Zurich provides strong evidence for the effect of 
goals, in accord with the original study of cabdrivers: Ernst Fehr and 
Lorenz Goette, “Do Workers Work More if Wages Are High? Evidence 
from a Randomized Field Experiment,” American Economic Review 97 
(2007): 298-317. 

communicate a reference point Daniel Kahneman, “Reference Points, 
Anchors, Norms, and Mixed Feelings,” Organizational Behavior and 
Human Decision Processes 51 (1992): 296-312. 

“wins the contest ’! John Alcock, Animal Behavior: An Evolutionary 
Approach (Sunderland, MA: Sinauer Associates, 2009), 278-84, cited by 
Eyal Zamir, “Law and Psychology: The Crucial Role of Reference Points 
and Loss Aversion,” working paper, Hebrew University, 2011. 
merchants, employers, and landlords: Daniel Kahneman, Jack L. 
Knetsch, and Richard H. Thaler, “Fairness as a Constraint on Profit 
Seeking: Entitlements in the Market,” The American Economic Review7Q 
(1986): 728-41. 

fairness concerns are economically significant Ernst Fehr, Lorenz 
Goette, and Christian Zehnder, “A Behavioral Account of the Labor Market: 
The Role of Fairness Concerns,” Annual Review of Economics 1 (2009): 
355-84. Eric T. Anderson and Duncan I. Simester, “Price Stickiness and 
Customer Antagonism,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 125 (2010): 
729-65. 

altruistic punishment is accompanied: Dominique de Quervain etal., “The 
Neural Basis of Altruistic Punishment,” Science 305 (2004): 1254-58. 
actual losses and foregone gains: David Cohen and Jack L. Knetsch, 
“Judicial Choice and Disparities Between Measures of Economic Value,” 
Osgoode Hall Law Review 30 (1992): 737-70. Russell Korobkin, “The 
Endowment Effect and Legal Analysis,” Northwestern University Law 



Review97 (2003): 1227-93. 

asymmetrical effects on individual \nell-being: Zamir, “Law and 
Psychology." 


29: The Fourfold Pattern 

and other disasters'. Including exposure to a “Dutch book,” which is a set of 
gambles that your incorrect preferences commit you to accept an {to&gt; 
puzzle thatAllais constructed: Readers who are familiar with the Aliais 
paradoxes will recognize that this version is new. It is both much simpler 
and actually a stronger violation than the original paradox. The left-hand 
option is preferred in the first problem. The second problem is obtained by 
adding a more valuable prospect to the left than to the right, but the right- 
hand option is now preferred. 

sorely disappointed: As the distinguished economist Kenneth Arrow 
recently described the event, the participants in the meeting paid little 
attention to what he called “Allais’s little experiment.” Personal 
conversation, March 16,2011. 

estimates for gains: The table shows decision weights for gains. 
Estimates for losses were very similar. 

estimated from choices: Ming Hsu, Ian Krajbich, Chen Zhao, and Colin F. 
Camerer, “Neural Response to Reward Anticipation under Risk Is 
Nonlinear in Probabilities,” Journal of Neuroscience 29 (2009): 2231-37. 
parents of small children: W. Kip Viscusi, Wesley A. Magat, and Joel 
Huber, “An Investigation of the Rationality of Consumer Valuations of 
Multiple Health Risks,” RAND Journal of Economics 18 (1987): 465-79. 
psychology of worry. In a rational model with diminishing marginal utility, 
people should pay at least two-thirds as much to reduce the frequency of 
accidents from 15 to 5 units as they are willing to pay to eliminate the risk. 
Observed preferences violated this prediction. 

not made much of it C. Arthur Williams, “Attitudes Toward Speculative 
Risks as an Indicator of Attitudes Toward Pure Risks,” Journal of Risk and 
Insurance 33 (1966): 577-86. Howard Raiffa, Decision Analysis: 
Introductory Lectures on Choices under Uncertainty (Reading, MA: 
Addison-Wesley, 1968). 

shadow of civil trials: Chris Guthrie, “Prospect Theory, Risk Preference, 
and the Law,” North\Aestem University Law Review 97 (2003): 1115-63. 
Jeffrey J. Rachlinski, “Gains, Losses and the Psychology of Litigation,” 
Southern California Law Review 70 (1996): 113-85. Samuel R. Gross 
and Kent D. Syverud, “Getting to No: A Study of Settlement Negotiations 



and the Selection of Cases for Trial,” Michigan Law Review 90 (1991): 
319-93. 

the frivolous claim: Chris Guthrie, “Framing Frivolous Litigation: A 
Psychological Theory,” University of Chicago Law Review 67 (2000): 
163-216. 


30: Rare Events 

wish to avoid it George F. Loewenstein, Elke U. Weber, Christopher K. 
Hsee, and Ned Welch, “Risk as Feelings,” Psychological Bulletin 127 
(2001): 267-86. 

vividness in decision making: Ibid. Cass R. Sunstein, “Probability 
Neglect: Emotions, Worst Cases, and Law,” Yale Law Journal 112 (2002): 
61-107. See notes to chapter 13: Damasio, Descartes’ Error. Slovic, 
Finucane, Peters, and MacGregor, “The {r, n&gt;: C. A Affect Heuristic.” 
Amos’s student Craig R. Fox, “Strength of Evidence, Judged Probability, 
and Choice Linder Uncertainty,” Cognitive Psychology 38 (1999): 167-89. 
focal event and its: Judgments of the probabilities of an event and its 
complement do not always add up to 100%. When people are asked 
about a topic they know very little about (“What is your probability that the 
temperature in Bangkok will exceed 100° tomorrow at noon?”), the judged 
probabilities of the event and its complement add up to less than 100%. 
receiving a dozen roses: In cumulative prospect theory, decision weights 
for gains and losses are not assumed to be equal, as they were in the 
original version of prospect theory that I describe. 

superficial processing: The question about the two urns was invented by 
Dale T. Miller, William Turnbull, and Cathy McFarland, “When a 
Coincidence Is Suspicious: The Role of Mental Simulation,” Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology 57 (1989): 581-89. Seymour Epstein 
and his colleagues argued for an interpretation of it in terms of two 
systems: Lee A. Kirkpatrick and Seymour Epstein, “Cognitive-Experiential 
Self-Theory and Subjective Probability: Evidence for Two Conceptual 
Systems,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 63 (1992): 534- 
44. 

judged it as more dangerous: Kimihiko Yamagishi, ‘When a 12.86% 
Mortality Is More Dangerous Than 24.14%: Implications for Risk 
Communication,” Applied Cognitive Psychology 11 (1997): 495-506. 
forensic psychologists: Slovic, Monahan, and MacGregor, “Violence Risk 
Assessment and Risk Communication.” 

“1 of 1,000 capital cases’ ! Jonathan J. Koehler, “When Are People 



Persuaded by DNA Match Statistics?” Law and Human Behavior 25 
(2001): 493-513. 

studies of choice from experience: Ralph Hertwig, Greg Barron, Elke U. 
Weber, and Ido Erev, “Decisions from Experience and the Effect of Rare 
Events in Risky Choic e,” Psychological Science 15 (2004): 534-39. 
Ralph Hertwig and Ido Erev, “The Description-Experience Gap in Risky 
Choice,” Trends in Cognitive Sciences 13 (2009): 517-23. 
not yet settled: Liat Hadar and Craig R. Fox, “Information Asymmetry in 
Decision from Description Versus Decision from Experience,” Judgment 
and Decision Making 4 (2009): 317-25. 

“chances of rare events’\ Hertwig and Erev, “The Description-Experience 
Gap.” 


31: Risk Policies 

inferior option BC: The calculation is straightforward. Each of the two 
combinations consists of a sure thing and a gamble. Add the sure thing to 
both options of the gamble and you will find AD and BC. 
the equivalent of “locking in’ 1 . Thomas Langer and Martin Weber, “Myopic 
Prospect Theory vs. Myopic Loss Aversion: How General Is the 
Phenomenon?” Journal of E {&gt;Joenon?&amp;conomic Behavior &amp; 
Organization 56 (2005): 25-38. 

32: Keeping Score 

drive into a blizzard: The intuition was confirmed in a field experiment in 
which a random selection of students who purchased season tickets to the 
university theater received their tickets at a much reduced price. A follow¬ 
up of attendance revealed that students who had paid the full price for their 
tickets were more likely to attend, especially during the first half of the 
season. Missing a show one has paid for involves the unpleasant 
experience of closing an account in the red. Arkes and Blumer, “The 
Psychology of Sunk Costs.” 

the disposition effect: Hersh Shefrin and Meir Statman, “The Disposition to 
Sell Winners Too Early and Ride Losers Too Long: Theory and Evidence,” 
Journal of Finance 40 (1985): 777-90. Terrance Odean, “Are Investors 
Reluctant to Realize Their Losses?” Journal of Finance 53 (1998): 1775- 
98. 

less susceptible: Ravi Dhar and Ning Zhu, “Up Close and Personal: 
Investor Sophistication and the Disposition Effect,” Management Science 



52 (2006): 726-40. 

fallacy can be overcome: Darrin R. Lehman, Richard O. Lempert, and 
Richard E. Nisbett, “The Effects of Graduate Training on Reasoning: 
Formal Discipline and Thinking about Everyday-Life Events,” American 
Psychologist43 (1988): 431-42. 

“a sinking feeling’ 1 . Marcel Zeelenberg and Rik Pieters, “A Theory of 
Regret Regulation 1.0,” Journal of Consumer Psychology 17 (2007): 3- 
18. 

regret to normality. Kahneman and Miller, “Norm Theory.” 
habitually taking unreasonable risks: The hitchhiker question was 
inspired by a famous example discussed by the legal philosophers Hart 
and Honore: “A woman married to a man who suffers from an ulcerated 
condition of the stomach might identify eating parsnips as the cause of his 
indigestion. The doctor might identify the ulcerated condition as the cause 
and the meal as a mere occasion.” Unusual events call for causal 
explanations and also evoke counterfactual thoughts, and the two are 
closely related. The same event can be compared to either a personal 
norm or the norm of other people, leading to different counterfactuals, 
different causal attributions, and different emotions (regret or blame): 
Herbert L. A. Hart and Tony Honore, Causation in the Law (New \brk: 
Oxford University Press, 1985), 33. 

remarkably uniform: Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky, “The 
Simulation Heuristic,” in Judgment Under Uncertainty: Heuristics and 
Biases, ed. Daniel Kahneman, Paul Slovic, and Amos Tversky (New York: 
Cambridge University Press, 1982), 160-73. 

applies to blame: Janet Landman, “Regret and Elation Following Action 
and Inaction: Affective Responses to Positive Versus Negative 
Outcomes,” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 13 (1987): 524- 
36. Faith Gleicher et al., “The Role of Counterfactual Thinking in Judgment 
of Affect,” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 16 (1990): 284-95. 
actions that deviate from the default. Dale T. Miller and Brian R. Taylor, 
“Counterfactual Thought, Regret, and Superstition: How to Avoid Kicking 
Yourself,” in What Might Have Been: The Social Psychology of 
Counterfactual Thinking, ed. Neal J. Roese and James M. Olson 
(Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum, 1995), 305-31. 

produce blame and regret. Marcel Zeelenberg, Kees van den Bos, Eric 
van Dijk, and Rik Pieters, “The Inaction Effect in the Psychology of Regret,” 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 82 (2002): 314-27. 
brand names over generics: Itamar Simonson, “The Influence of 
Anticipating Regret and Responsibility on Purchase Decisions,” Journal of 



Consumer Research 19(1992): 105-18. 

clean up their portfolios: Lilian Ng and Qinghai Wang, “Institutional Trading 
and the Turn-of-the-Year Effect,” Journal of Financial Economics 74 
(2004): 343-66. 

loss averse for aspects of your life: Tversky and Kahneman, “Loss 
Aversion in Riskless Choice.” Eric J. Johnson, Simon Gachter, and 
Andreas Herrmann, “Exploring the Nature of Loss Aversion,” Centre for 
Decision Research and Experimental Economics, University of 
Nottingham, Discussion Paper Series, 2006. Edward J. McCaffery, 
Daniel Kahneman, and Matthew L. Spitzer, “Framing the Jury: Cognitive 
Perspectives on Pain and Suffering,” Virginia Law Review 81 (1995): 
1341-420. 

classic on consumer behavior. Richard H. Thaler, “Toward a Positive 
Theory of Consumer Choice,” Journal of Economic Behavior and 
Organization 39 (1980): 36-90. 

taboo tradeoff: Philip E. Tetlock et al., “The Psychology of the Unthinkable: 
Taboo Trade-Offs, Forbidden Base Rates, and Heretical Counterfactuals,” 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 78 (2000): 853-70. 
where the precautionary principle: Cass R. Sunstein, The Laws of Fear: 
Beyond the Precautionary Principle (New \brk: Cambridge University 
Press, 2005). 

“psychological immune system’ 1 . Daniel T. Gilbert et al., “Looking Forward 
to Looking Backward: The Misprediction of Regret "Psychological 
Science 15 (2004): 346-50. 

33: Reversals 

in the man’s regular store: Dale T. Miller and Cathy McFarland, 
“Counterfactual Thinking and Victim Compensation: A Test of Norm 
Theory,” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 12 (1986): 513-19. 
reversals of judgment and choice: The first step toward the current 
interpretation was taken by Max H. Bazerman, George F. Loewenstein, 
and Sally B. White, “Reversals of Preference in Allocation Decisions: 
Judging Alternatives Versus Judging Among Alternatives,” Administrative 
Science Quarterly 37 (1992): 220-40. Christopher Hsee introduced the 
terminology of joint and separate evaluation, and formulated the important 
evaluability hypothesis, which explains reversals by the idea that some 
attributes {e a#822become evaluable only in joint evaluation: “Attribute 
Evaluability: Its Implications for Joint-Separate Evaluation Reversals and 
Beyond,” in Kahneman and Tversky, Choices, Values, and Frames. 



conversation between psychologists and economists : Sarah Lichtenstein 
and Paul Slovic, “Reversals of Preference Between Bids and Choices in 
Gambling Decisions,” Journal of Experimental Psychology 89 (1971): 
46-55. A similar result was obtained independently by Harold R. Lindman, 
“Inconsistent Preferences Among Gambles,” Journal of Experimental 
Psychology 89 (1971): 390-97. 

bewildered participant For a transcript of the famous interview, see Sarah 
Lichtenstein and Paul Slovic, eds., The Construction of Preference (New 
York: Cambridge University Press, 2006). 

the prestigious American Economic Review: David M. Grether and 
Charles R. Plott, “Economic Theory of Choice and the Preference 
Reversals Phenomenon,” American Economic Review 69 (1979): 623- 
28. 

“context in which the choices are made’ 1 . Lichtenstein and Slovic, The 
Construction of Preference, 96. 

one embarrassing finding: Kuhn famously argued that the same is true of 
physical sciences as well: Thomas S. Kuhn, “The Function of Measurement 
in Modern Physical Science,” Isis 52 (1961): 161-93. 
liking of dolphins: There is evidence that questions about the emotional 
appeal of species and the willingness to contribute to their protection yield 
the same rankings: Daniel Kahneman and liana Ritov, “Determinants of 
Stated Willingness to Pay for Public Goods: A Study in the Headline 
Method,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 9 (1994): 5-38. 
superior on this attribute: Hsee, “Attribute Evaluability.” 

“requisite record-keeping’*. Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, David 
Schkade, and liana Ritov, “Predictably Incoherent Judgments,” Stanford 
LawReview54 (2002): 1190. 

34: Frames and Reality 

unjustified influences of formulation: Amos Tversky and Daniel 
Kahneman, “The Framing of Decisions and the Psychology of Choice,” 
Science 211 (1981): 453-58. 

paid with cash or on credit Thaler, “Toward a Positive Theory of 
Consumer Choice.” 

10% mortality is frightening: Barbara McNeil, Stephen G. Pauker, Harold 
C. Sox Jr., and Amos Tversky, “On the Elicitation of Preferences for 
Alternative Therapies,” New England Journal of Medicine 306 (1982): 
1259-62. 

“Asian disease problem’ 1 . Some people have commented that the “Asian” 



label is unnecessary and pejorative. We probably would not use it today, 
but the example was written in the 1970s, when sensitivity to group labels 
was less developed than it is today. The word was added to make the 
example more concrete by reminding respondents of the Asian flu epidem 
{an s less ic of 1957. 

Choice and Consequence: Thomas Schelling, Choice and Consequence 
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1985). 
misleading frame: Richard P. Larrick and Jack B. Soli, “The MPG Illusion,” 
Science 320 (2008): 1593-94. 

rate of organ donation in European countries: Eric J. Johnson and Daniel 
Goldstein, “Do Defaults Save Lives?” Science 302 (2003): 1338-39. 

35: Two Selves 

“wantability*. Irving Fisher, “Is ‘Utility’ the Most Suitable Term for the 
Concept It Is Used to Denote?” American Economic Review 8 (1918): 
335. 

at any moment Francis Edgeworth, Mathematical Psychics (New \brk: 
Kelley, 1881). 

under \Ahich his theory holds: Daniel Kahneman, Peter P. Wakker, and 
Rakesh Sarin, “Back to Bentham? Explorations of Experienced Utility,” 
Quarterly Journal of Economics 112 (1997): 375-405. Daniel Kahneman, 
“Experienced Utility and Objective Happiness: A Moment-Based 
Approach” and “Evaluation by Moments: Past and Future,” in Kahneman 
and Tversky, Choices, Values, and Frames, 673-92, 693-708. 
a physician and researcher. Donald A. Redelmeier and Daniel 
Kahneman, “Patients’ Memories of Painful Medical Treatments: Real-time 
and Retrospective Evaluations of Two Minimally Invasive Procedures,” 
Pain 66 (1996): 3-8. 

free to choose: Daniel Kahneman, Barbara L. Frederickson, Charles A. 
Schreiber, and Donald A. Redelmeier, “When More Pain Is Preferred to 
Less: Adding a Better End,” Psychological Science 4 (1993): 401-405. 
duration of the shock: Orval H. Mowrer and L. N. Solomon, “Contiguity vs. 
Drive-Reduction in Conditioned Fear: The Proximity and Abruptness of 
Drive Reduction,” American Journal of Psychology 67 (1954): 15-25. 
burst of stimulation: Peter Shizgal, “On the Neural Computation of Utility: 
Implications from Studies of Brain Stimulation Reward,” in Well-Being: 
The Foundations of Hedonic Psychology, ed. Daniel Kahneman, Edward 
Diener, and Norbert Schwarz (New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 1999), 
500-24. 



36: Life as a Story 


had a lover. Paul Rozin and Jennifer Stellar, “Posthumous Events Affect 
Rated Quality and Happiness of Lives,” Judgment and Decision Making 4 
(2009): 273-79. 

entire lives as we// as brief episodes : Ed Diener, Derrick Wirtz, and 
Shigehiro Oishi, “End Effects of Rated Life Quality: The James Dean 
Effect,” Psychological Science 12 (2001): 124-28. The same series of 
experiments also tested for the peak-end rule in an unhappy life and found 
similar results: Jen was not judged twice as unhappy if she lived miserably 
for 60 years rather than 30, but {thk-e she was regarded as considerably 
happier if 5 mildly miserable years were added just before her death. 

37: Experienced Well-Being 

life as a v\hole these days: Another question that has been used frequently 
is, “Taken all together, how would you say things are these days? Would 
you say that you are very happy, pretty happy, or not too happy?” This 
question is included in the General Social Survey in the United States, and 
its correlations with other variables suggest a mix of satisfaction and 
experienced happiness. A pure measure of life evaluation used in the 
Gallup surveys is the Cantril Self-Anchoring Striving Scale, in which the 
respondent rates his or her current life on a ladder scale in which 0 is “the 
worst possible life for you” and 10 is “the best possible life for you.” The 
language suggests that people should anchor on what they consider 
possible for them, but the evidence shows that people all over the world 
have a common standard for what a good life is, which accounts for the 
extraordinarily high correlation (r = .84) between the GDP of countries and 
the average ladder score of their citizens. Angus Deaton, “Income, Health, 
and Well-Being Around the World: Evidence from the Gallup World Poll,” 
Journal of Economic Perspectives 22 (2008): 53-72. 

“a dream team’ 1 . The economist was Alan Krueger of Princeton, noted for 
his innovative analyses of unusual data. The psychologists were David 
Schkade, who had methodological expertise; Arthur Stone, an expert on 
health psychology, experience sampling, and ecological momentary 
assessment; Norbert Schwarz, a social psychologist who was also an 
expert on survey method and had contributed experimental critiques of 
well-being research, including the experiment on which a dime left on a 
copying machine influenced subsequent reports of life satisfaction. 
intensity of various feelings: In some applications, the individual also 



provides physiological information, such as continuous recordings of heart 
rate, occasional records of blood pressure, or samples of saliva for 
chemical analysis. The method is called Ecological Momentary 
Assessment: Arthur A. Stone, Saul S. Shiftman, and Marten W. DeVries, 
“Ecological Momentary Assessment Well-Being: The Foundations of 
Hedonic Psychology,” in Kahneman, Diener, and Schwarz, Well-Being, 
26-39. 

spend their time: Daniel Kahneman et al., “A Survey Method for 
Characterizing Daily Life Experience: The Day Reconstruction Method,” 
Science 306 (2004): 1776-80. Daniel Kahneman and Alan B. Krueger, 
“Developments in the Measurement of Subjective Well-Being,” Journal of 
Economic Perspectives 20 (2006): 3-24. 

physiological indications of emotion: Previous research had documented 
that people are able to “relive” feelings they had in a past situation when 
the situation is retrieved in sufficiently vivid detail. Michael D. Robinson 
and Gerald L. Clore, “Belief and Feeling: Evidence for an Accessibility 
Model of Emotional Self-Report,” Psychological Bulletin 128 (2002): 934- 
60. 

state the U-index: Alan B. Krueger, ed., Measuring the Subjective Well- 
Being of Nations: National Accounts of Time Use and Well-Being 
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2009). 

distributio {i&gt;dll-Being: Ed Diener, “Most People Are Happy,” 
Psychological Science 7 (1996): 181-85. 

Gallup World Poll: For a number of years I have been one of several 
Senior Scientists associated with the efforts of the Gallup Organization in 
the domain of well-being. 

more than 450,000 responses: Daniel Kahneman and Angus Deaton, 
“High Income Improves Evaluation of Life but Not Emotional Well-Being,” 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 107 (2010): 16489- 
93. 

worse for the very poor. Dylan M. Smith, Kenneth M. Langa, Mohammed 
U. Kabeto, and Peter Ubel, “Health, Wealth, and Happiness: Financial 
Resources Buffer Subjective Well-Being After the Onset of a Disability,” 
Psychological Science 16 (2005): 663-66. 

$75,000 in high-cost areas: In a TED talk I presented in February 2010 I 
mentioned a preliminary estimate of $60,000, which was later corrected. 
eat a bar of chocolate!: Jordi Quoidbach, Elizabeth W. Dunn, K. V. 
Petrides, and Moira Mikolajczak, “Money Giveth, Money Taketh Away: The 
Dual Effect of Wealth on Happiness,” Psychological Science 21 (2010): 
759-63. 



38: Thinking About Life 

German Socio-Economic Panel: Andrew E. Clark, Ed Diener, and Yannis 
Georgellis, “Lags and Leads in Life Satisfaction: A Test of the Baseline 
Hypothesis.” Paper presented at the German Socio-Economic Panel 
Conference, Berlin, Germany, 2001. 

affective forecasting: Daniel T. Gilbert and Timothy D. Wilson, “Why the 
Brain Talks to Itself: Sources of Error in Emotional Prediction,” 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 364 (2009): 1335-41. 
only significant fact in their life: Strack, Martin, and Schwarz, “Priming and 
Communication.” 

questionnaire on life satisfaction: The original study was reported by 
Norbert Schwarz in his doctoral thesis (in German) “Mood as Information: 
On the Impact of Moods on the Evaluation of One’s Life” (Heidelberg: 
Springer Verlag, 1987). It has been described in many places, notably 
Norbert Schwarz and Fritz Strack, “Reports of Subjective Well-Being: 
Judgmental Processes and Their Methodological Implications,” in 
Kahneman, Diener, and Schwarz, Well-Being, 61-84. 
goals that young people set The study was described in William G. 
Bowen and Derek Curtis Bok, The Shape of the River. Long-Term 
Consequences of Considering Race in College and University 
Admissions (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1998). Some of 
Bowen and Bok’s findings were reported by Carol Nickerson, Norbert 
Schwarz, and Ed Diener, “Financial Aspirations, Financial Success, and 
Overall Life Satisfaction: Who? and How?” Journal of Happiness Studies 
8(2007): 467-515. 

“being very well-off financially’ 1 . Alexander Astin, M. R. King, and G. T. 
Richardson, “The American Freshman: National Norms for Fall 1976,” 
Cooperative Institutional Research Program of the American C {he on, 
Rouncil on Education and the University of California at Los Angeles, 
Graduate School of Education, Laboratory for Research in Higher 
Education, 1976. 

money was not important These results were presented in a talk at the 
American Economic Association annual meeting in 2004. Daniel 
Kahneman, “Puzzles of Well-Being,” paper presented at the meeting. 
happiness of Californians: The question of how well people today can 
forecast the feelings of their descendants a hundred years from now is 
clearly relevant to the policy response to climate change, but it can be 
studied only indirectly, which is what we proposed to do. 
aspects of their lives: In posing the question, I was guilty of a confusion that 
I now try to avoid: Happiness and life satisfaction are not synonymous. Life 



satisfaction refers to your thoughts and feelings when you think about your 
life, which happens occasionally—including in surveys of well-being. 
Happiness describes the feelings people have as they live their normal life. 
I had won the family argument However, my wife has never conceded. 
She claims that only residents of Northern California are happier. 
students in California and in the Midwest Asian students generally 
reported lower satisfaction with their lives, and Asian students made up a 
much larger proportion of the samples in California than in the Midwest. 
Allowing for this difference, life satisfaction in the two regions was 
identical. 

How much pleasure do you get from your car?: Jing Xu and Norbert 
Schwarz have found that the quality of the car (as measured by Blue Book 
value) predicts the owners’ answer to a general question about their 
enjoyment of the car, and also predicts people’s pleasure during joyrides. 
But the quality of the car has no effect on people’s mood during normal 
commutes. Norbert Schwarz, Daniel Kahneman, and Jing Xu, “Global and 
Episodic Reports of Hedonic Experience,” in R. Belli, D. Alwin, and F. 
Stafford (eds.), Using Calendar and Diary Methods in Life Events 
Research (Newbury Park, CA: Sage), pp. 157-74. 
paraplegics spend in a bad mood?: The study is described in more detail 
in Kahneman, “Evaluation by Moments.” 

think about their situation: Camille Wortman and Roxane C. Silver, 
“Coping with Irrevocable Loss, Cataclysms, Crises, and Catastrophes: 
Psychology in Action,” American Psychological Association, Master 
Lecture Series 6 (1987): 189-235. 

studies of colostomy patients: Dylan Smith et al., “Misremembering 
Colostomies? Former Patients Give Lower Utility Ratings than Do Current 
Patients,” Health Psychology 25 (2006): 688-95. George Loewenstein 
and Peter A. Ubel, “Hedonic Adaptation and the Role of Decision and 
Experience Utility in Public Policy,” Journal of Public Economics 92 
(2008): 1795-1810. 

the word miswanting: Daniel Gilbert and Timothy D. Wilson, “Miswanting: 
Some Problems in Affective Forecasting,” in Feeling and Thinking: The 
Role of Affect in Social Cognition, ed. Joseph P. Forgas (New York: 
Cambridge University Press, 2000), 178-97. 

Conclusions 

too important to be ignored: Paul Dolan and Daniel Kahneman, 
“Interpretations of Utility and Their Implications for the Valuation of Health,” 



Economic Journal 118 (2008): 215-234. Loewenstein and Ubel, 
“Hedonic Adaptation and the Role of Decision and Experience Utility in 
Public Policy.” 

guide government policies: Progress has been especially rapid in the UK, 
where the use of measures of well-being is now official government policy. 
These advances were due in good part to the influence of Lord Richard 
Layard’s book Happiness: Lessons from a New Science, first published in 
2005. Layard is among the prominent economists and social scientists 
who have been drawn into the study of well-being and its implications. 
Other important sources are: Derek Bok, The Politics of Happiness: What 
Government Can Learn from the New Research on Well-Being 
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2010). Ed Diener, Richard Lucus, 
Ulrich Schmimmack, and John F. Helliwell, Well-Being for Public Policy 
(New York: Oxford University Press, 2009). Alan B. Krueger, ed., 
Measuring the Subjective Well-Being of Nations: National Account of 
Time Use and Well-Being (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2009). 
Joseph E. Stiglitz, Amartya Sen, and Jean-Paul Fitoussi, Report of the 
Commission on the Measurement of Economic Performance and Social 
Progress. Paul Dolan, Richard Layard, and Robert Metcalfe, Measuring 
Subjective Well-being for Public Policy: Recommendations on 
Measures (London: Office for National Statistics, 2011). 

Irrational is a strong word. The view of the mind that Dan Ariely has 
presented in Predictably Irrational: The Hidden Forces That Shape Our 
Decisions (New York: Harper, 2008) is not much different from mine, but 
we differ in our use of the term. 

accept future addiction: Gary S. Becker and Kevin M. Murphy, “A Theory 
of Rational Addiction,” Journal of Political Economics 96 (1988): 675- 
700. Nudge: Richard H. Thaler and Cass R. Sunstein, Nudge: Improving 
Decisions About Health, Wealth, and Happiness (New Haven: Yale 
University Press, 2008). 

can institute and enforce: Atul Gawande, The Checklist Manifesto: Howto 
Get Things Right (New York: Holt, 2009). Daniel Kahneman, Dan Lovallo, 
and Oliver Sibony, “The Big Idea: Before Nbu Make That Big Decision...” 
Harvard Business Review89 (2011): 50-60. 

distinctive vocabulary. Chip Heath, Richard P. Larrick, and Joshua 
Klayman, “Cognitive Repairs: How Organizational Practices Can 
Compensate for Individual Shortcomings,” Research in Organizational 
Behavior20 (1998): 1-37. 



Index 


The index that appeared in the print version of this title does not match the 
pages in your eBook. Please use the search function on your eReading 
device to search for terms of interest. For your reference, the terms that 
appear in the print index are listed below. 


adaptation level 

Add-1 task 

adjustment; insufficient 
affect heuristic; availability and 
affective forecasting 
airplane crashes 
Ajzen, leek 
Alar scare 

algorithms; Apgar scores; hostility to; multiple regression 

Allais, Maurice 

al-Qaeda 

ambiguity, suppression of 
American Economic Review 
amygdala 
anchoring index 

anchors, anchoring; as adjustment; associative coherence in; 
associative memory and; measurement of; as priming effect; 
random, power of; in System 1 and System 2; uses and abuses 
of 

anesthesiologists 
angry faces 
anomalies 
anterior cingulate 
Apgar, Virginia 
Apgar scores 
aphorisms 
Ariely, Dan 
Arrow, Kenneth 
art experts 



artifacts, in research 
Asch, Solomon 
Ashenfelter, Orley 
Asian disease problem 
assessments, basic 

associations; activated ideas in; causality and; priming and 
associative coherence; in anchoring; halo effect and; plausibility 
and, associative coherence (cont .); WYSIATI (what you see is all 
there is) and 

associative memory; abnormal events and; anchoring and; 
causality and; confirmation bias and; creativity and; and 
estimates of causes of death 
Astebro, Thomas 
Atlantic, The 
attention; in self-control 
paneight="0%" width-'-5%"&gt; 

Attention and Effort (Kahneman) 

Auerbach, Red 
authoritarian ideas 

availability; affect and; and awareness of one’s biases; 
expectations about; media and; psychology of; risk assessment 
and, see risk assessment 
availability cascades 
availability entrepreneurs 


bad and good, distinctions between 
banks 

bank teller problem 
Barber, Brad 
Bargh, John 
baseball 
baseball cards 
baseline predictions 

base rates; in cab driver problem; causal; in helping experiment; 

low; statistical; in Tom W problem; in Yale exam problem 

basic assessments 

basketball 

basketball tickets 

bat-and-ball problem 

Baumeister, Roy 



Bayes, Thomas 
Bayesian statistics 
Bazerman, Max 
Beane, Billy 
Beatty, Jackson 
Becker, Gary 

“Becoming Famous Overnight” (Jacoby) 
behavioral economics 
Behavioral Insight Team 

“Belief in the Law of Small Numbers” (Tverskyand Kahneman) 

beliefs: bias for; past, reconstruction of 

Benartzi, Shlomo 

Bentham, Jeremy 

Berlin, Isaiah 

Bernoulli, Daniel 

Bernouilli, Nicholas 

Beyth, Ruth 

bicycle messengers 

Black Smn, The (Taleb) 
blame 

Blink (Gladwell) 

Borg, Bjorn 
Borgida, Eugene 

“Boys Will Be Boys” (Barber and Odean) 

Bradlee, Ben 

brain; amygdala in; anterior cingulate in; buying and 

selling and; emotional framing and; frontal area of; 

pleasure and; prefrontal area of; punishment and; sugar 

in; threats and; and variations of probabilities 

British Toxicology Society 

broad framing 

Brockman, John 

broken-leg rule 

budget forecasts 

Built to Last (Collins and Porras) 

Bush, George W. 

business and leadership practices; at Google 
business pundits 


Cabanac, Michel 



cab driver problem 
cabdrivers, New York City 
Californians 
Camerer, Colin 

cancer; surgery vs. radiation for 
Cantril Self-Anchoring Striving Scale 
Carroll, Lewis 

cars and driving; brakes in; driving tests; fuel economy 

and; pleasure from 

cash box 

categories 

causal base rates 

causal interpretations; correlation and; regression 

effects and 

causal situations 

causal stereotypes 

causes, and statistics 

CEOs; optimistic 

certainty effect 

CFOs 

Chabris, Christopher 

chance and randomness; misconceptions of 
changing one’s mind 
Checklist Manifesto, A (Gawande) 
chess 

children: caring for; depressed; time spent with 
China 

Choice and Consequence (Schelling) 
choice architecture 

choices: from description; from experience; see 
also decisions, decision making; risk assessment 
“Choices, Values, and Frames” (Kahneman and 
Tversky) 

CIA 

Clark, Andrew 
climate 

Clinical vs. Statistical Prediction: A Theoretical 

Analysis and a Reviewofthe Evidence (Meehl) 

Clinton, Bill 

Coelho, Marta 

coffee mug experiments 



cognitive busyness 

cognitive ease; in basic assessments; and illusions 
of remembering; and illusions of truth; mood and; 
and writing persuasive messages; WYSIATI (what 
you see is all there is) and 

cognitive illusions; confusing experiences with 
memories; of pundits; of remembering; of skill; of 
stock-picking skill; of truth; of understanding; of 
validity 

Cognitive Reflection Test (CRT) 
cognitive strain 
Cohen, David 

coherence; see also associative coherence 

Cohn, Beruria 

coincidence 

coin-on-the-machine experiment 
coId-hand experiment 
Collins, Jim 
colonoscopies 
colostomy patients 
competence, judging of 
competition neglect 
complex vs. simple language 
concentration 
cogndiv height="0%"&gt; 

“Conditions for Intuitive Expertise: A Failure to Disagree” 
(Kahnemanand Klein) 

confidence; bias of, over doubt; overconfidence; WYSIATI (what 

you see is all there is) and 

confirmation bias 

conjunction fallacy 

conjunctive events, evaluation of 

“Consequences of Erudite Vernacular Utilized Irrespective of 

Necessity: Problems with Using Long Words Needlessly” 

(Oppenheimer) 

contiguity in time and place 

control 

cookie experiment 

correlation; causation and; illusory; regression and; shared 
factors and 
correlation coefficient 
cost-benefit correlation 



costs 

creativity; associative memory and 
credibility 

Csikszentmihalyi, Mihaly 
curriculum team 


Damasio, Antonio 
dating question 
Dawes, Robyn 

Day Reconstruction Method (DRM) 

death: causes of; life stories and; organ donation and; reminders 
of 

Deaton, Angus 

decisions, decision making; broad framing in; and choice from 
description; and choice from experience; emotions and vividness 
in; expectation principle in; in gambles, see gambles; global 
impressions and; hindsight bias and; narrow framing in; 
optimistic bias in; planning fallacy and; poverty and; premortem 
and; reference points in; regret and; risk and, see risk 
assessment 
decision utility 

decision weights; overweighting; unlikely events and; in utility 
theory vs. prospect theory; vivid outcomes and; vivid probabilities 
and 

decorrelated errors 
default options 
denominator neglect 
depression 

Detroit/Michigan problem 
Diener, Ed 

die roll problem 
dinnerware problem 
disclosures 
disease threats 
disgust 

disjunctive events, evaluation of 

disposition effect 

DNA evidence 

dolphins 

Dosi, Giovanni 



doubt; bias of confidence over; premortem and; 

suppression of 

Duke University 

Duluth, Minn., bridge in 

duration neglect 

duration weighting 


earthquakes 

eating 

eBay 

Econometrics 

economics; behavioral; Chicago school of; 
neuroeconomics; preference reversals and; rational- 
agent model in 

economic transactions, fairness in 

Econs and Humans 

Edge 

Edgeworth, Francis 
education 

effectiveness of search sets 
effort; least, law of; in self-control 
ego depletion 
electricity 
electric shocks 

emotional coherence, see halo effect emotional learning 
emotions and mood: activities and; affect heuristic; 
availability biases and; in basic assessments; cognitive 
ease and; in decision making; in framing; mood 
heuristic for happiness; negative, measuring; and 
outcomes produced by action vs. inaction; paraplegics 
and; perception of; substitution of question on; in vivid 
outcomes; in vivid probabilities; weather and; work and 
employers, fairness rules and 
endangered species 

endowment effect; and thinking like a trader 

energy, mental 

engagement 

Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding, An 
(Hume) 

entrepreneurs; competition neglect by 



Epley, Nick 
Epstein, Seymour 
equal-weighting schemes 
Erev, Ido 

evaluability hypothesis 

evaluations: joint; joint vs. single; single 

evidence: one-sided; of witnesses 

executive control 

expectation principle 

expectations 

expected utility theory, see utility theory 
experienced utility 
experience sampling 

experiencing self; well-being of; see also well-being 
expert intuition; evaluating; illusions of validity of; 
overconfidence and; as recognition; risk assessment 
and; vs. statistical predictions; trust in 
expertise, see skill 

Expert Political Judgment: How Good Is It? How Can 
We KnoW? (Tetlock) 

Exxon Valdez oil spill 
eyes, pupil dilation in 


face reading 
fairness 

fallacies; conjunction; narrative; planning; sunk-cost 
familiarity 

Far Side, The (Larson) 
fast and frugal heuristic 
fast thinking 
fatigue 
fear 

Fechner, Gustav 
feedback 
Feller, William 
financial crisis of 2008 
fi 

nancial advisers and forecasters 

firefighters 

first impressions 



Fischhoff, Baruch 
flight instructors 
flood monitor 
Florida effect 
flow 

flowers syllogism 
Flyvbjerg, Bent 
focus 

focusing illusion 
fonts 

forecasts, see predictions and forecasts 

football game 

Ford Motor Company 

formulas; algorithms; Apgar scores; hostility to; for 
interviews; multiple regression 
formulation effects 
Fortune 

fourfold pattern; in legal cases 
Fox, Craig 
Fox, Seymour 

frames, framing; in Asian disease problem; in child 
exemption problem; in disclosures; emotional; fuel 
economy and; good; in KEEP-LOSE study; organ 
donation and; regulations on; in survival-mortality 
experiment; in ticket problem 
Frederick, Shane 
Freedman, David 
freedom 

Free to Choose (Friedman) 
frequency representation 
Frey, Bruno 
Friedman, Milton 

frowning; availability heuristic and; representativeness 
and 


gains 

Galinsky, Adam 

Gallup-Healthways Well-Being Index 
Galton, Francis 

gambles; bundling of; certainty effect and; emotional 



framing in; loss aversion in; lottery; mixed; and 

outcomes produced by action vs. inaction; possibility 

effect and; psychological value of; regret and; simple; 

St. Petersburg paradox and; vs. sure things; utility 

ongsv&gt; see also risk assessment 

Gates Foundation 

Gawande, Atul 

Georgellis, Yannis 

German Socio-Economic Panel 

gestures 

Gibbs, Lois 

Gigerenzer, Gerd 

Gilbert, Daniel 

Gilovich, Tom 

Gladwell, Malcolm 

global warming 

glucose 

goals 

golf 

good and bad, distinctions between 
Google 

gorilla experiment 
gossip 

Gottman, John 
Gould, Stephen Jay 

grades and grade point averages (GPAs) 

grading students’ essays 

Grether, David 

groupjoining 

Guthrie, Chris 


Haidt, Jonathan 
halo effect 

Halo Effect, The (Rosenzweig) 

happiness; of Californians; dating question and; income 

and; life stories and; marriage and; mood heuristic for; 

see also well-being happy faces 

happy words 

Harding, Warren G. 

Harvard Medical School 



Harvard University 

health: disease threats and; well-being and; risks and; 
see also medicine 
health survey problem 
health violation penalties 
Hebrew University of Jerusalem 
“Hedgehog and the Fox, The” (Berlin) 
hedonimeter 
Heider, Fritz 
helping experiment 
Hertwig, Ralph 
Hess, Eckhard 
heuristic, definition of 
high school curriculum team 
hindsight: bias in; regret and 
historical events 
hitchhiker question 
Hitler, Adolf 
Hogarth, Robin 
honesty box 

“How Mental Systems Believe” (Gilbert) 

Howto Solve It (Polya) 

Hsee, Christopher 
hubris hypothesis 
Humans and Econs 
Hume, David 
hunger 

hypotheses, testing 


ideomotor effect 

illusions: cognitive, see cognitive illusions; Muller-Lyer; 3-D 

i mag inability, immediate gratification 

incongruity 

independent judgments 
indifference map 
inheritances 
injection puzzle 

In Search of Excellence (Peters and Waterman) 

inside view 

insurance 



intelligence; in marriage; pretentious language and 

intensity matching 

intention 

interviews; in Israeli Defense Forces 

Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation 
(Bentham) 

intuition: acquisiitiodution of; common use of word; of experts, 

see expert intuition; predictive, see predictions and forecasts; as 

recognition; Simon’s definition of 

Inventor’s Assistance Program 

investments: stock portfolios; sunk-cost fallacy and 

Invisible Gorilla, The (Chabris and Simons) 

irrationality 

Israel, bombings in 

Israeli Defense Forces: flight instructors in; interviews in; 
leaderless group challenge in 
Israeli Ministry of Education 


“Jabberwocky” (Carroll) 

Jacoby, Larry 
Jencks, Christopher 
joint evaluations; single evaluations vs. 
judgment heuristics 

Judgment in Managerial Decision Making (Bazerman) 
judgments; basic assessments in; of experts, see expert intuition; 
intensity matching in; mental shotgun in; predictive, see 
predictions and forecasts; sets and prototypes in; summary, of 
complex information; see also decisions, decision making 
“Judgment Under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases” (Tversky 
and Kahneman) 

Julie problem 

jumping to conclusions; bias for belief and confirmation in; halo 
effect in, see halo effect; suppression of ambiguity and doubt in; 
WYSIATI in, see what you see is all there is 


Kaye, Danny 

keeping score; mental accounts and; regret and; responsibility 
and 

KEEP-LOSE study 



kidney cancer 
Killing Ground, The 
kitchen renovations 
Klein, Gary 
Knetsch, Jack 
know, use of word 

knowledge; reconstruction of past states of 
kouros 

Krueger, Alan 

Kunreuther, Howard 
Kuran, Timur 


labor negotiations 
Lady Macbeth effect 
language, complex vs. simple 
Larrick, Richard 
Larson, Gary 

law, see legal cases law of large numbers 

law of small numbers; and bias of confidence over doubt 

laziness of System 2 

Layard, Richard 

leaderless group challenge 

leadership and business practices; at Google 

LeBoeuf, Robyn 

legal cases: civil, damages in; DNA evidence in; fourfold pattern 

and; frivolous; loss aversion in; malpractice; outcome bias in 

leisure time 

less-is-more pattern 

Lewis, Michael 

libertarian policies 

Lichtenstein, Sarah 

life: evaluation of; stories in; satisfaction in; thinking about 
Linda problem 
List, John 
loans 

logarithmic functions 

loss aversion; in animals; enhanced; goals as reference points in; 
in legal decisions; status quo and 
loss aversion ratio 



losses 
lotteries 
Lovallo, Dan 
Love Canal 
luck 
lying 


Malkiel, Burton 
Malmendier, Ulrike 
malpractice litigation 
Mao Zedong 
march of historyuote&gt; 

Markowitz, Harry 

marriage; life satisfaction and 

Mathematical Psychology (Dawes, Tversky, and 

Coombs) 

matter, relation of mind to 
McFarland, Cathy 
media, availability heuristic and 
medical school admissions 
medical survey problem 

medicine; expertise in; malpractice litigation; 

overconfidence in; physicians; unique cases in; unusual 

treatments in 

Mednick, Sarnoff 

Meehl, Paul 

meetings 

memory, memories; associative, see associative 

memory; availability heuristic and, see availability; 
duration neglect in; experienced utility and; illusions of; 
and the remembering self; of vacations 
mental accounts 

mental effort, see effort mental energy 
mental shotgun 
mere exposure effect 
messages, persuasive 
metaphors 

Michigan/Detroit problem 
Michigan State University 
Michotte, Albert 



Miller, Dale 

mind, relation of matter to 
Mischel, Walter 
miswanting 
MIT 

money and wealth: cultural differences in attitudes 
toward; happiness and; income vs. leisure; mental 
accounts and; poverty; priming and; utility of 
Moneyball (Lewis) 

mood, see emotions and mood Morgenstern, Oskar 

Moses illusion 

motivation 

movies 

“MPG Illusion, The” (Larrick and Soil) 
mug experiments 

Mullainathan, Sendhil 
Muller-Lyer illusion 
multiple regression 
Mussweiler, Thomas 
mutual funds 


names: complicated; of famous people 
narrative fallacy 

narrow framing; disposition effect 

Naturalistic Decision Making (NDM) 

negativity dominance 

negotiations 

neuroeconomics 

New York Times, The 

New York University 

9/11 

Nisbett, Richard 
Nixon, Richard 
Nobel Prize 
norms 
norm theory 
novelty 

Nudge (Thaler and Sunstein) 
nutrition 



Oakland A’s 
Obama, Barack 
obesity 
Odean, Terry 

Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs 

one-sided evidence 

Oppenheimer, Danny 

optimal experience 

optimism; in CEOs; resilience and 

optimistic bias; competition neglect; in entrepreneurs; 

overconfidence; planning fallacy; premortem and; risk 

taking and 

Oregon Research Institute 
organ donation 
organizations 
outcome bias 
outside view 


ou&gt; 

pain; chronic; cold-hand experiment and; colonoscopies 
and; duration neglect and; injection puzzle and; memory 
of; operation experiment and; peak-end rule and; in rats 
paraplegics 
parole 

past: and confusing experiences with memories; hindsight bias 

and; regret and 

pastness 

pattern seeking 

Pavlov, Ivan 

peak-end rule 

persuasive messages 

physicians; malpractice litigation and 

piano playing and weight, measuring 

plane crashes 

planning fallacy; mitigating 

plausibility 

pleasure; in rats 

Plott, Charles 



poignancy 
political experts 
political preference 
Polya, George 
Pope, Devin 
Porras, Jerry I. 
positive test strategy 

possibility effect: gambles and; threats and 

post-traumatic stress 

poverty 

precautionary principle 
predictability, insensitivity to 

predictions and forecasts; baseline; clinical vs. statistical; 
disciplining; of experts, see expert intuition; extreme, value of; 
formulas for, see formulas; increasing accuracy in; low-validity 
environments and; nonregressive; objections to moderating; 
optimistic bias in; outside view in; overconfidence in; planning 
fallacy and; short-term trends and; valid, illusion of; see also 
probability 

preference reversals; unjust 
premonition, use of word 
premortem 

pretentiousness language 
pricing policies 
priming; anchoring as 

Princeton University 

probability; base rates in, see base rates; decision weights and, 
see decision weights; definitions of; and disciplining intuition; 
less-is-more pattern and; Linda problem and; overestimation of; 
plausibility and; and predicting by representativeness; prior, 
insensitivity to; professional stereotypes and; of rare events, see 
rare events; representativeness and, see representativeness; 
similarity and; subjective; as sum-like variable; see also 
predictions and forecasts 
probability neglect 

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
professional stereotypes 
professorial candidates 

prospect theory; in Albert and Ben problem; blind spots of; 
cumulative; decision weights and probabilities in; fourfold pattern 


in; frames and; graph of losses and gains in; loss aversion in; 
reference points in 

“Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision Under Risk” 

(Kahneman and Tversky) 

prototypes 

psychiatric patients 

psychological immune system 

psychology, teaching 

psychopathic charm 

psychophysics 

psychotherapists 

pundits; see also expert intuition punishments: altruistic; rewards 
and; self-administered 
pupil dilation 


questionnaire and gift experiments 
questions; substitution of, see substitution 


Rabin, Matthew 
radiologists 
rafters, skilled 
rail projects 

randomness and chance; misconceptions of Random Walk 

Dow 7 Wall Street, A (Malkiel) 

rare events; overestimation of; regret and 

rational-agent model 

rationality 

Rationality and the Reflective Mind (Stanovich) 

"&gt;rats 

Reagan, Ronald 
reciprocal priming 
recognition 

recognition-primed decision (RPD) model 
Redelmeier, Don 
reference class forecasting 

regression to the mean; causal interpretations and; correlation 
and; difficulty in grasping; two-systems view of 
“Regression towards Mediocrity in Hereditary Stature” (Galton) 
regret 



religion 

remembering self 
Remote Association Test (RAT) 
reorganizations in companies 
repetition 

representativeness; base rates and; see also base rates; in 
Linda problem; predicting by; professional stereotypes and; sins 
of; in Tom W problem 

research: artifacts in; hypothesis testing in; optimism in 

resemblance; in predictions 

resilience 

responsibility 

retrievability of instances 

reversals; unjust 

rewards; self-administered 

Rice, Condoleezza 

risk assessment; aggregation and; broad framing in; decision 
weights in, see decision weights; denominator neglect and; by 
experts; and format of risk expression; fourfold pattern in; for 
health risks; hindsight bias and; laws and regulations governing; 
loss aversion in; narrow framing in; optimistic bias and; policies 
for; possibility effect and; precautionary principle and; probability 
neglect and; public policies and; small risks and; of technologies; 
terrorism and; see also gambles 
risk aversion 
risk seeking 

“Robust Beauty of Improper Linear Models in Decision Making, 
The” (Dawes) 

Rosett, Richard 
Rosenzweig, Philip 
Royal Dutch Shell 
Royal Institution 
Rozin, Paul 
&lt; Philip 

Rumsfeld, Donald 
Russell Sage Foundation 
Russia 


Saddam Hussein 
sadness 



safety; health risks and; health violation penalties and; 
precautionary principle and 

samples, sampling: accidents of; and bias of confidence over 

doubt; law of large numbers; law of small numbers; size of; small, 

exaggerated faith in 

Samuelson, Paul 

San Francisco Exploratorium 

Savage, Jimmie 

Save More Tomorrow 

Schelling, Thomas 

Schkade, David 

school size 

Schwarz, Norbert 

Schweitzer, Maurice 

Science 

Scientific American 
scientific controversies 

scientific research: artifacts in; hypothesis testing in; optimism in 

Scottish Parliament 

self-control 

self-criticism 

Seligman, Martin 

selves; experiencing; remembering 
sets 

Shafir, Eldar 
similarity judgments 
Simmel, Mary-Ann 
Simon, Herbert 
Simons, Daniel 
Simpson
, O. J. 

single evaluations; joint evaluations vs. 
ski jump event 

skills; acquisition of; environment of; feedback and practice in; 

illusions of; in stock-picking 

Slovic, Paul 

Slovic, Roz 

slow thinking 

&lt;="0&gt; 

smiles, in face reading 
smiling; availability heuristic and 
Smith, Vernon 



socializing 
social science 
Soli, Jack 

somatic marker hypothesis 
soul 

Sources of Poi/ier (Klein) 

Soviet Union 
Spinoza, Baruch 
Sports Illustrated 
Stalin, Joseph 
Standard &amp; Poor’s (S&amp;P) 

Stanford University 
Stanovich, Keith 

statistics and statistical thinking; and accidents of sampling; base 
rates and, see base rates; Bayesian; and bias of confidence over 
doubt; causes and; chance in; deciding on size of sample; 
extreme outcomes and; faith in small samples; law of large 
numbers; law of small numbers; sample size decisions and; see 
also probability 
status quo, defending 
Steiger, James H. 

stereotypes; causal; about professions 

Steve the librarian 

stock market 

stock picking 

stock portfolios 

stock trading, insider 

Stone, Arthur 

stories, life 

St. Petersburg paradox 
Strack, Fritz 

strangers, assessment of 
Strangers to Ourselves (Wilson) 

Streep, Meryl 
strength, assessments of 
structured settlements 
Stumbling to Happiness (Gilbert) 

substitution; and mood heuristic for happiness; and 3-D heuristic 
success, uot 
sum-like variables 
sunk-cost fallacy 



Sunstein, Cass 
Super Bowl 
supply and demand 
surgeons 

Surowiecki, James 
surprise 

survey and gift experiments 
survival-mortality experiment 
symbols 

System 1; characteristics of; conflict between System 2 and 
System 2; conflict between System 1 and; laziness of 


Taleb, Nassim 

talent 

task sets 

task switching 

Tate, Geoffrey 

taxes; child exemptions and 

temperament 

temptation 

Tenet, George 

terrorism 

Tetlock, Philip 

Thaler, Richard 

theory-induced blindness 

therapists 

thinking like a trader 
Thomas, Lewis 
threats; possibility effect and 
3-D heuristic 

tickets; buying and selling of; sunk cost in 

time; use of 

time pressure 

Todorov, Alex 

token experiment 

Tom W problem 

“Trading Is Hazardous to Your Wealth” (Barber and Odean) 
transactions and trades 
Traviata, La (Verdi) 

Truman, Harry 

trustworthiness, assessments of 



truth, illusions of 
Tversky, Amos 


understanding, illusion of 
unique cases 
University College London 
University of California at Berkeley 
University of Chicago 
University of Michigan 
University of Minnesota 
University of Oregon 

unlikely events, see rare events unknown unknowns 

utility; decision; experienced; indifference map and; injection 

puzzle and; meanings of 

utility theory; certainty effect and; decision weights and 
probabilities in 


vacations 

vaccines 

validity: of clinical vs. statistical predictions; evaluating; illusion of 
Vallone, Robert 

value; see also utility Vancouver Island 

Venn diagrams 

venture capitalists 

victim compensation 

vividness; of outcomes; of probabilities 

vocabulary: of girls vs. boys; simple vs. pretentious 

Vohs, Kathleen 

vomit, effect of word 

Von Neumann, John 

voting 


Wainer, Howard 

walking 

wars 

Washington Post, The 
wealth, see money and wealth 
weather 



Weber, Ernste&gt; 

weight and piano playing, measuring 
Weiner, Howard 

well-being; climate and; defining; disposition for; duration 
weighting and; see also happiness 
West, Richard 

what you see is all there is (WYSIATI); confidence and; curriculum 

team and; Julie problem and; optimistic bias and; premortem 

and; professorial candidate problem and; soldiers’ performance 

and; Tom W problem and 

wheel of fortune 

“wicked” environments 

Wilson, Timothy 

Wimbledon tournament 

wine 

Winter Olympics 

Wisdom of Crowds, The (Surowiecki) 
witnesses’ evidence 
Woods, Tiger 

words: complex vs. simple; emotionally-loaded 
World Cup 
World War II 
worry 

WYSIATI, see what you see is all there is 


X-rays 
Xu, Jing 


Yale exam problem 
Yom Kippur War 


Zajonc, Robert 
Zamir, Eyal 
Zeller, Kathryn 
Zweig, Jason 
Zwerling, Harris 



Farrar, Straus and Giroux 
18 West 18th Street, NewYork 10011 

Copyright ©2011 by Daniel Kahneman 
All rights reserved 

Grateful acknovledgment is made for permission to reprint the following 
previously published material: “Judgment Under Uncertainty: Heuristics 
and Biases" from Science, New Series, Voi. 185, No. 4157, copyright© 
1974 by Amos Tversky and Dan"0%" te&gt;X-rays Science. “Choices, 
Values, and Frames" from The American Psychologist, copyright© 1983 
by Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky. Reprinted by permission of the 
American Psychological Association. 

Grateful acknovledgment is made for permission to reprint the folloving 
images: Image courtesy of Paul Ekman Group, LLC. Image from “Cues of 
Being Watched Enhance Cooperation in a Real-World Setting" by Melissa 
Bateson, Daniel Nettle, and Gilbert Roberts, Biology Letters (2006); 
reprinted by permission of Biology Letters. Image from Mind Sights by 
Roger N. Shepard (New York: W.H. Freeman and Company, 1990); 
reprinted by permission of Henry Holt and Company. Image from 
“Human Amygdala Responsivity to Masked Fearful Eye Whites" by Paul J. 
Whalen et al., Science 306 (2004). Reprinted by permission of Science. 

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Kahneman, Daniel, 1934- 

Thinking, fast and slow/Daniel Kahneman. — 1st ed. 
p. cm. 

Includes bibliographical references and index. 

ISBN: 978-0-3742-7563-1 

1. Thought and thinking. 2. Decision making. 3. Intuition. 4. 
Reasoning. I. Title. 

BF441 K238 2011 
153.4'2 — dc23 

2011027143 


wmifsgbooks. com 







- 5 , 47 . 


-Feature introduced in detail in part 4. 


-Feature introduced in detail in part 4. 


-Feature introduced in detail in part 4. 


-Feature introduced in detail in part 4. 


-Feature introduced in detail in part 4. 


-This article originally appeared in Science, vol. 185, 1974. The research 
was supported by the Advanced Research Projects Agency of the 
Department of Defense and was monitored by the Office of Naval 
Research under contract N00014-73-C-0438 to the Oregon Research 
Institute, Eugene. Additional support for this research wass r"0%" wid 
provided by the Research and Development Authority of the Hebrew 
University, Jerusalem, Israel. 


-This article was originally presented as a Distinguished Scientific 
Contributions Award address at the American Psychological Association 
meeting, August 1983. This work was supported by grant NR 197-058 
from the U.S. Office of Naval Research. Originally published in American 
Psychologist, vol. 34,1984. 




